International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Abdominal adiposity is the main determinant of the C-reactive response to 
injury 

Michael Mendall
Michael Mendall    
Michael Mendall
Michael Mendall
St George’s Medical School, UK    
  Abstract 

Background:  Obesity  and  serum C-reactive  protein (CRP)  (a sensitive  marker  of  inflammatory  activity)  are associated  with 
most  chronic  diseases.  Abdominal  adiposity  along  with  age  is  the  strongest  determinant  of  baseline  CRP  levels  in  healthy 
subjects.  The  mechanism  of  the  association  of  serum  CRP  with  disease  is  uncertain.  We  hypothesized  that  baseline  serum 
CRP  is  a  marker  of  inflammatory  responsiveness  to  injury  and  that  abdominal  adiposity  is  the  main  determinant  of  this 
responsiveness.  We  tested  this  hypothesis  by  studying  the  effect  of  abdominal  adiposity,  age  and  other  environmental  risk 
factors for chronic disease on the CRP response to a standardised surgical insult. 

Method  and  Results:  102  male  subjects  aged  24-94  underwent  unilateral  hernia  repair  by  a  single  operator.  CRP  was 
measured  at  0,  6,  24  and  48  hrs.  Response  was  defined  as  the  peak  CRP  adjusted  for  baseline  CRP.  Age  and  waist:hip 
ratio(WHR)  were  associated  both  with  basal  CRP  and  CRP  response  with  similar  effect  sizes  after  adjustment  for  a  wide-
range  of  covariates.  The  adjusted  proportional  difference  in  CRP  response  per  10%  increase  in  WHR  was  1.50(1.17-1.91) 
p=0.0014  and  1.15(1.00-1.31)  p=0.05  per  decade  increase  in  age.  There  was  no  evidence  of  important  effects  of  other 
environmental cardiovascular risk factors on CRP response. 

Conclusion:  The  finding  that  age  and  waist:  hip  ratio  influence  baseline  and  post-operative  CRP  levels  to  a  similar  extent 
suggests  that  baseline  CRP  is  a  measure  of  inflammatory  responsiveness    to  casual  stimuli  and  that  higher  age  and  obesity 
modulate the generic excitability of the inflammatory system leading to both higher baseline CRP and higher CRP response to 
surgery.  The  mechanism  for  the  association  of  baseline  CRP  and  waist:  hip  ratio  to  chronic  disease  outcomes  could  be 
through this increase in inflammatory system excitability. 

Biography 

Michael  Mendall  qualified  from  Cambridge  and  London  Universities.  He  undertook  his  research  at  St  George’s  Medical 
School  London  and  was  awarded  an  MD  (London)  in  1995.  He  is  Consultant  Gastroenterologist  and  Head  of  Service  for 
Medical  Specialties  at  Croydon  University  Hospital  and  Honorary  Senior  Lecturer  at  St  George’s  Medical  School.  He  has 
published  more  than  75  papers  in  reputed  journals  including  a  number  with  more  than  500  citations. He  has  been  R&D 
director at CUH and was lead for the London GI Specialty Research Group. 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

