International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Secular changes of body fat and physical fitness of preschool children over 
the last century  

Abstract 

Jana Paririririzkov
Jana Pa
zkovaaaa    
Jana Pa
Jana Pa
zkovzkov
Obesity Management Centre, Czech republic 
     

Body mass index (BMI) of Czech children measured in 1895,  compared with those in 2010 was found to be lowest. Repeated 
measurements  of  representative  samples  of  children    (up  to  100,000  subjects  in  ten  year  intervals)  from  the  1950s  until  the 
present, revealed slightly higher and fluctuating BMI values along with accelerated growth. However, measurements of body 
composition  revealed  increasing  adiposity  in  school  children  and  adolescents  in  many  countries  along  with  deteriorating 
physical  fitness  levels  (aerobic  power,  motor  performance,  etc.).    Such  changes  were  always  smaller  in  growing  subjects 
involved in adequate physical activity regimes and exercise – provided  the character, intensity, duration and frequency were 
appropriate. Comparing preschool children  (4-6  years) examined in the fifties and seventies of the last century and recently 
revealed  a  significant  increase  of  adiposity  (skinfold  thicknesses)  ,  which  was  accompanied  with  a  significant  reduction  of 
motor abilities (testing broad jump, ball throw, etc.). Mentioned changes were smaller in children who had a special physical 
activity regime in kindergarten including increased physical aktivity; in children who took part in special physical  education 
classes  of  preschoolers  with  one  of  the  parents,  and/or  any  other  caretaker;  and  in  children  who  were  most  active 
spontaneously. Positive changes from adequate physical activity and sports training regimes were even more apparent during 
later years. In obese growing subjects, adequate exercise proved to be the most effectively reducing factor. In conclusion, the 
undesirable impact of  present-day lifestyle choices including sedentarim influences negatively the growing  organism from a 
much earlier age than previously assumed. 

Biography 

Jana  Parizkova,  Professor  (2003),  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  D.Sc.  She  is  working  in  Obesity  Management  Centre,  Institute  of 
Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic. Published  cca  580 articles  in reputed journals, monographs, Proceedings etc, , and 
20  monographs  in the  USA, Switzerland, Germany, Poland, Czech Republic etc. on body composition, functional capacity, 
obesity  as related to nutrition and dietary intake, physical activity and exercise  during life span, especially during growth and 
development.   

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

