International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Endoplasmic Reticulum stress is sufficient for the induction of IL-1β 
production via activation of the NF-ĸβ and inflammasome pathways  

 

Abstract 

    HunHunHunHun----Taeg Chung
Taeg Chung    
Taeg Chung
Taeg Chung
University of Ulsan, Republic of Korea
     

The  mechanisms  underlying  pathophysiological  states  such  as  metabolic  syndrome  and  obesity  are  known  to  include 
endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  stress  and  aberrant  inflammatory  responses.  ER  stress  occurs  as  the  result  of  accumulation  of 
misfolded  proteins  during  stress  conditions.  However,  the  precise  mechanisms  by  which  ER  stress  modulates  inflammation 
remain incompletely understood. In this study, we hypothesized that ER stress alone could represent a sufficient signal for the 
modulation  of  inflammasome-dependent  cytokine  responses.  We  found  that  several  ER  stress-inducing  chemicals  (e.g., 
tunicamycin) and the free fatty acid palmitate can trigger IL-1β secretion in various cell types including monocytic leukemia 
cells, primary macrophages and differentiated adipocytes.  We show that ER stress primes cells for the expression of pro-IL-
1β  via NF-ĸB activation and  promotes IL-1β secretion. Enhanced IL-1β  secretion  depended on the activation  of the  NLRP3 
inflammasome  through  a  mechanism  involving  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  formation  and  activation  of  thioredoxin-
interacting  protein.  Chemical  chaperones  (e.g.  4-phenylbutyric  acid)  as  well  as  the  pharmacological  application  of  carbon 
monoxide (CO) inhibited IL-1β secretion in response to ER stress treatments. In conclusion, our results provide a mechanistic 
link between ER stress and the regulation of inflammation, and furthermore suggest that modulation of ER stress may provide 
a potential therapeutic opportunity to block progression of low grade chronic inflammation to metabolic syndrome.  

Biography 

Hun  Taeg  Chung  graduated  Chunnam  National  University  Medical  School  and  completed  his  Ph.D  at  the  age  of  33  years 
from Chunbug  National University and  postdoctoral studies from Utah University School  of Medicine. He is the director  of 
meta-Inflammation Research Center, Korean Basic Research Laboratory Program. He has published more than 200 papers in 
reputed journals and serving as an editorial board member of Nitric Oxide and Medical Gas Research. He has been working 
on the role of bioactive gases (NO, CO, H2S) in metabolism and metabolic syndromes. He has much interest in the inhibitory 
effects of CO on the meta-inflammation. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

