International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Childhood obesity in Asia with particular reference to Malaysia 

Abstract 

Ismail Noor
Ismail Noor    
Ismail Noor
Ismail Noor
University Technology MARA, Malaysia 
     

Rapid and sustained economic growth, modernization,  urbanization plus the  globalization  of food  markets, and significantly 
less physical activity in all sectors have fuelled the obesity epidemic in developing economies. Collectively these factors have 
underpinned the worldwide nutrition transition and associated societal changes. One of the more problematic consequences is 
that  in  Asian  countries  undergoing  nutrition  transition,  over-nutrition  often  co-exists  with  under-nutrition.  Under-nutrition 
early  in  life  and  subsequent  obesity  in  adulthood  predisposes  such  individuals  to  high  blood  pressure,  heart  disease  and 
diabetes at an earlier age and in a more severe form than those who were never undernourished. Current obesity levels range 
from  below  5% in  China  and Japan to  much  higher  rates  in  other  countries  however despite  relatively  low  prevalence rates 
across  countries  like  China,  the  rates  are  almost  20%  in  some  cities.  Estimates  suggest  that  in  Thailand  the  prevalence  of 
obesity in 5-12 year-old children rose from12.2-15-6% in two years. In the Pacific region, childhood obesity had already more 
than doubled to 5% in 2006 and is expected to rise to 7% - a threefold increase over previous studies. In Asia the average is 
also  forecast  to  rise  threefold  from  1.5%  to  5.3%.  Complications  due  to  inconsistent  measurement  approaches,  the 
appropriateness of criteria for cut-offs, the relationship of overweight and obesity with co-morbidities coupled with the lack of 
systematic  monitoring  are  some  of  the  major  concern  in  the  formulation  and  effective  implementation  of  intervention 
programs in developing countries. 

Biography 

Ismail  Noor  obtained  his  PhD  in  1983  from  the  University  of  London.  His  major  research  interest  includes  energy 
requirements, obesity and sports nutrition. He was the pioneer member of the Nutrition Society of Malaysia and the Malaysian 
Association  for  the  study  of  Obesity  (MASO)  for  which  he  has  been  the  President  since  1995.  He  has  made  invaluable 
contribution to IUNS’s and IASO’s association network in Asia. He is responsible for organizing the International Congress 
on Obesity (ICO 2014) to be held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and is currently the Secretary of IASO (2010-2014). Professor 
Ismail is the Fellow, International Union of Nutritional Sciences (2005). 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

