International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Perceptions of neighborhood environment and prevalent obesity – Insights 
from the Dallas heart study  

Tiffany M. Powell
Tiffany M. Powell----WileyWileyWileyWiley    
Tiffany M. Powell
Tiffany M. Powell
National Institutes of Health, USA    
  Abstract 

Although psychosocial stress  can result in  adverse health  outcomes, little  is  known about how  perceptions  of  neighborhood 
conditions, a measure of environment-derived stress, may impact obesity.  We examined the association between perceptions 
of neighborhood environment and obesity [body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2] among 5907 participants in the Dallas Heart 
Study,  a  multi-ethnic,  probability-based  sample  of  Dallas  County  residents.    Participants  were  asked  to  respond  to  18 
questions  about  neighborhood  perceptions.  Using  factor  analysis,  we  identified  three  factors  associated  with  neighborhood 
perceptions: neighborhood violence, physical environment, and social cohesion.  Logistic regression analyses were performed 
to  determine  the relationship  between  each factor (higher  quintile =  more  unfavorable perceptions)  and the  odds  of  obesity.  
Decreasing  age,  income,  and  education  associated  with  unfavorable  overall  neighborhood  perceptions  and  unfavorable 
perceptions  about  specific  neighborhood  factors  (p  trend  <0.05  for  all).    Increasing  BMI  was  associated  with  unfavorable 
perceptions about physical environment (p trend <0.05), but not violence or social cohesion.  After adjustment for race, age, 
sex,  income,  education,  and  length  of  residence,    physical  environment  perception  score  in  the  highest  quintile  remained 
associated with a 25% greater odds of obesity [OR 1.25,(95% CI 1.03-1.50)].  Predictors of obesity related to environmental 
perceptions  included  heavy  traffic  [OR  1.39,(1.17-1.64)],  trash/litter  in  neighborhood[OR  1.27,(1.01-1.46)],  lack  of 
recreational areas[OR 1.21,(1.01-1.46)], and lack of sidewalks[OR 1.25,(95% CI 1.04-1.51)].  Thus, unfavorable perceptions 
of  environmental  physical  conditions  are  related  to  prevalent  obesity.    Efforts  to  improve  the  physical  characteristics  of 
neighborhoods, or perceptions of those characteristics, may assist in the prevention of obesity in this community. 

Biography 

Tiffany M. Powell-Wiley is an assistant clinical investigator in the Applied Research Program of the National Cancer Institute 
and in the Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute at the National Institutes of 
Health.    Her  research  focuses  on  defining  and  intervening  on  social  determinants  that  promote  obesity.    Dr.  Powell-Wiley 
graduated  from  University  of  Michigan,  Duke  University  School  of  Medicine,  and  University  of  North  Carolina  School  of 
Public  Health.    Prior  to  joining  NIH,  Dr.  Powell-Wiley  completed  internal  medicine  residency  at  Brigham  and  Women’s 
Hospital and cardiology fellowship at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.   

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

