International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Replication and prioritization of biological pathways from genome-wide 
association analysis of extreme obesity  

Sujoy Ghosh
Sujoy Ghosh    
Sujoy Ghosh
Sujoy Ghosh
North Carolina Central University, USA    
  Abstract 

Pathway  analysis  addresses  the  missing  heritability  problem  of  SNP-centered  GWAS  data  analysis  by  hypothesizing  that  a 
sufficient  number  of  non-overlapping,  non-concurrent  disruptions  in  biological  pathways,  even  with  modest  fractional 
contributions  from  single  gene-variants,  may  be  adequate  to  lead  to  a  disorder.  This  approach  is  particularly  relevant  for 
disorders such as polygenic obesity where the contributions from individual SNP variants are typically quite low. However, a 
challenge  faced  by  pathway  analysis  is  that  of  replicating  and  prioritizing  statistically  associated  pathways  for  downstream 
functional  validation  studies.  To  address  this  issue,  we  have  developed  a  dual  strategy  of  statistical  replication  and 
bioinformatic  analysis,  and  applied  this  to  identify  and  prioritize  pathways  based  on  GWA  studies  of  extreme  obesity.  We 
employed 2 pathway analysis tools (iGSEA4GWAS and GSA-SNP) on an imputed ‘Discovery’ (985 cases/869 controls, BMI 
43.1±8.7  and  20.3±1.84,  respectively)  and  ‘Replication’  (540  cases/520  controls,  BMI  49.4±8.8  and  20.7±1.8,  respectively) 
cohort. Sixty-two (iGSEA4GWAS) and 22 (GSA-SNP) KEGG pathways from the Discovery cohort (p<0.05) were analyzed 
in  the  Replication  cohort.  A  total  of  19  pathways  were  replicated  (p<0.05  level)  between  the  2  tools.  The  19  replicated 
pathways were subsequently analyzed by the SNPNEXUS algorithm to calculate a ‘SNP-burden’ for each pathway, based on 
the estimated functional effects of the SNPs contained in them. A total of 16546 SNPs were analyzed. SNPs were scored for 
their  location  on  chromosomal  regions  containing  CPG  islands,  insertion-deletion  regions,  copy  number  polymorphisms, 
inversions, transcription factor binding sites, 3’- and 5’-UTRs, as well as amino-acid substitution effects on protein function. 
Finally, pathways  were ranked by their  predicted SNP-burden after normalization for the number of  SNPs in each pathway. 
Two-way  hierarchical clustering  of pathway ranks and functional SNP categories identified the ‘oxidative phosphorylation’, 
‘purine  metabolism’  and  ‘adipocytokine  signaling’  pathways  as  closely  clustered  with  high  SNP-burden  across  several 
functional categories. In conclusion, a combination of independent validation and bioinformatic analysis allows prioritization 
of GWAS pathway analysis to aid functional validation studies.   

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

