International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Are rural South African children abdominally obese? 

Daniel T Goon
Daniel T Goon    
Daniel T Goon
Daniel T Goon
University of Venda, South Africa    
  Abstract 

While available data exist on total body fat of rural South African children, as measured by body mass index, little is known 
concerning the abdominal obesity  of rural South African children. The aim of this study was to  determine the prevalence  of 
abdominal obesity among rural South African children. Participants involved 1 172 rural black school children (541 boys and 
631 girls) aged 10−16 years, residing in Mankweng and Toronto, both rural black settlements in Capricorn district, Limpopo 
province,  South  Africa.  Height,  weight  and  waist  circumference  were  measured  using  standard  techniques.  Waist-to-height 
ratio (WHtR) was calculated. A WHtR ≤ 0.50 was used to determine abdominal obesity. Results were analysed using student 
t-test and Chi-squared statistics, with a p-value of < 0.05. Waist-to-height ratio showed inconsistent results in both sexes and 
across  age  groups,  with  no  significant  differences  among  boys  and  girls  in  all  age  groups.  The  proportion  of  boys  with  a 
WHtR ≥ 0.5 was 69 (12.8%), while girls were 92 (14.6%). The highest proportion of WHtR occurs at age 11 in boys, while 
this proportionality increases with age in girls, peaking at ages 14-16 years. Overall, 161 (13.7%) children had central obesity. 
This study indicates that abdominal obesity as measured by WHtR is prevalent among rural black South African children. The 
prevalence of WHtR ≥ 0.5 (13.7%) among the children is worrisome, as its signals the presence of obesity-related problems 
and the likely  susceptibility  of these sample children  to future  health risks. Therefore, interventions strategies are  needed  to 
reduce  central  obesity  among  children.  Thus,  the  simple  message:  keep  your  waist  circumference  to  less  than  your  height, 
becomes imperative. 

Biography 

Daniel T Goon is a Lecturer at Centre for Biokinetics, Recreation and Sport Science, University of Venda, Thohoyandou, 
South Africa. His research interests include body composition assessment and physical fitness testing.  He is a level II 
accredited International Society for the Advancement of Kinantropometry (ISAK II). He has authored and co-authored more 
than 54 scientific publications in peer-reviewed journals and a reviewer to several journals. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

