International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

HDAC IIa-specific inhibitors as a potential novel therapy for type 2 
diabetes-mediated cognitive deterioration in alzheimer’s disease 

Giulio Maria Pasinetti
Giulio Maria Pasinetti    
Giulio Maria Pasinetti
Giulio Maria Pasinetti
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, USA    
  Abstract 

Our laboratory recently  demonstrated that epigenetic  chromatin  modifications associated  with type-2  diabetes (T2DM)  may 
play  a  role  in  brain  pathophysiology  in  neurodegenerative  disorders.  We  previously  discovered  that  there  are  significant 
changes in the expression of select chromatin modification enzymes, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs), in the brains of 
T2DM subjects compared to control subjects, and that these changes coincide with altered expression of proteins involved in 
synaptic  function,  such  as  PSD95  and  synaptophysin.  We  hypothesized  that  T2DM  may  induce  epigenetic  modifications 
associated with increased susceptibility  to Alzheimer’s disease (AD)-type neurodegeneration. Using a mouse model of diet-
induced  T2DM,  we  found  that,  similar  to  humans,  T2DM  mice  showed  differential  expression  of  epigenetic-modifying 
enzymes  in  the  brain  compared  to  controls.  In  particular,  we  found  significant  up-regulation  of  HDAC  class  IIa,  including 
HDACs 4, 5, and 9, in the brains of diabetic mice. These alterations coincided with increased susceptibility to oligomeric Aβ 
(oAβ)  induced  synaptic  toxicity  and  oAβ-induced  synaptic  dysfunction,  as  assessed  by  long  term  potentiation  (LTP).  Most 
interestingly,  we  found  that  inhibition  of  class  IIa  HDACs  using  an  HDAC  IIa-specific  inhibitor,  MC1568,  increased 
transcription levels of PSD95 and synaptophysin in primary neuron cultures from C57Bl6/J mice and prevented LTP deficits 
found in old-T2DM mouse ex vivo hippocampal slices. The studies provide much-needed information regarding mechanisms 
underlying  potential  risks  posed  by  diabetes  in  terms  of  diminishing  cognitive  function  and  may  provide  the  basis  for 
strategies aimed at early primary prevention against key risk factors for AD.   

Biography 

Giulio  Maria  Pasinetti’s  research  on  lifestyle  factors  and  metabolic  co-morbidities  influencing  clinical  dementia, 
neurodegeneration  and  Alzheimer’s  disease  has  made  him  a  top  expert  in  his  field.    He  has  received  over  30  grants  and 
published over 160 groundbreaking research articles.  Dr. Pasinetti is a Professor of Neurology, Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and 
Geriatrics  and  Adult  Development,  and  is  Director  of  the  Brain  Institute  Center  of  Excellence  for  Novel  Approaches  to 
Neurotherapeutics at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.  He also serves as Director of the Basic and Biomedical Research and 
Training, Geriatric Education and Clinical Center at the Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

