International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Obesity and cardiovascular disease- Focus on inflammation  

Noyan Gokce
Noyan Gokce    
Noyan Gokce
Noyan Gokce
Boston University School of Medicine, USA    
  Abstract 

Obesity is emerging as one of the most critical health care problems in the US and worldwide as ≥65% of the US population is 
currently overweight or obese. Obesity is closely linked to the development of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease that 
are important causes of morbidity and mortality associated with excess weight. Recently published work from our laboratory 
demonstrated that adipose tissue inflammation represents a key  pathological process linked to  metabolic stress  and  vascular 
endothelial  dysfunction  in  obese  subjects.  Triggers  of  inflammation  in  fat  are  unknown  but  highly  clinically  relevant  as 
individuals  with  reduced  inflammation  exhibit  a  much  more  favorable  risk  factor  profile  despite  their  severe  obesity, 
supporting  the  growing  notion  that  both  quality  and  quantity  of  fat  play  a  significant  role  in  shaping  cardiovascular 
phenotypes in human obesity. Our data also suggest that visceral fat is associated with a greater burden of cytokine production 
and we will present data to show direct human evidence that the visceral adipose microenvironment is more “toxic” to blood 
vessels, providing a potential mechanism linking visceral adiposity to cardiometabolic risk.  

Biography 

Noyan  Gokce  is  Associate  Professor  of  Medicine,  Director  of  Echocardiography  at  Boston  University  Medical  Center.  He 
received  his  MD  degree  from  Tufts  University  School  of  Medicine,  Boston  in  1992,  completed  residency  training  at  Beth 
Israel  Hospital,  Boston  in  1995,  followed  by  Cardiovascular  Fellowship  at  Boston  Medical  Center,  Boston  where  he  has 
served  as  attending  cardiologist  since  1998.  Dr.  Gokce  is  the  recipient  of  NIH  R01  grant  awards  studying  cardiovascular 
effects of obesity. He has published > 60 papers in peer reviewed journals and is currently an editorial board member for the 
journal Circulation: Cardiovascular Imaging.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

