International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Biophysical properties of the aorta, left ventricular properties and exercise 
capacity in obese adolescents 

George G S Sandor
George G S Sandor    
George G S Sandor
George G S Sandor
University of British Columbia, Canada    
  Abstract 

We sought to determine whether childhood obesity is associated with increased aortic stiffness by measuring the biophysical 
properties  of  the  aorta  in  obese  children  using  a  non-invasive  echo-Doppler  method.  We  also  sought  to  determine  if  any 
changes were associated with exercise capacity. Increased aortic stiffness is a strong predictor of future cardiovascular events 
and  mortality  in  adults.    Obesity  is  known  to  be  associated  with  increased  aortic  stiffness  and  arterial  disease  in  adults. 
Vascular function has been shown to be abnormal in obese adolescents. We prospectively evaluated a cohort of obese children 
(N=63) and compared them to normal weight controls (N=55).  Anthropometric data were recorded.  Using an echo-Doppler 
method,  pulse  wave  velocity  (PWV),  aortic  input  impedance  (Zi),  characteristic  impedance  (Zc),  arterial  pressure-strain 
elastic modulus (Ep), arterial wall stiffness index (β-index), and peak aortic velocity (PAoV) were calculated.  We correlated 
our  findings  with  lipid  levels.  We  assessed  left  ventricular  dimensions  and  standard  measures  of  cardiac  function.  
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing was performed on all obese children.Compared  to normal-weight children, obese children 
have  higher  PWV,  Zc,  β-index,  Ep  and  PAoV.  Obese  children  had  higher  systolic  blood  pressure  (BP)  than  normal-weight 
children but there was no difference in diastolic BP. LV dimensions and standard measures of cardiac systolic function were 
similar  in  the  two  groups  while  obese  children  had  altered  diastolic  properties.    Left  ventricular  (LV)  mass  was  higher  in 
obese children.  There was no association between lipid levels and the biophysical properties of the aorta.    Absolute oxygen 
consumption was 122% predicted while relative oxygen consumption was 68% predicted in obese children. 

Measures of the biophysical properties of the aorta are already abnormal in obese children reflecting increased aortic stiffness 
at this early stage of disease.  Obese children also have increased LV mass, altered diastolic properties and abnormal exercise 
capacity.  PWV may be useful in monitoring progression of arterial disease or the effect of therapeutic interventions. 

 

Biography 

G Sandor is Emeritus Professor in the Department of Paediatrics, UBC, and Director of the Echolab, BC Children’s Hospital. 
His  interests  are the  non-invasive assessment  of cardiac and  vascular  function in  congenital  and acquired  paediatric cardiac 
disease. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

