International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Bioactive food components and metabolic syndrome 

Kyung
Kyung----Jin Yeum
Jin Yeum    
Kyung
Kyung
Jin Yeum
Jin Yeum
Tufts University, USA    
  Abstract 

The rapid increase in prevalence of metabolic syndrome, which is associated with a state of elevated systemic oxidative stress, 
is projected to cause future increases in the prevalence of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Oxidation of polyunsaturated 
fatty acids and sugars produces reactive carbonyl species, which, due to their electrophilic nature, react with nucleophilic sites 
of  certain  amino  acids  leading  to  formation  of  protein  adducts  such  as  advanced  glycation/lipoxidation  end  products 
(AGEs/AGEs)  resulted  in  cellular  dysfunction.  Therefore,  an  effective  reactive  carbonyl  species  and  AGEs/ALEs 
sequestering  agent  can  prevent  such  cellular  dysfunction.    We  have  demonstrated  that  the  dietary  histidine-dipeptides  are 
effective sequester  of cytotoxic carbonyls and prevent various metabolic risk factors in  animal  model.  In addition,  bioactive 
components in plant foods such as carotenoids, tocopherols and oryzanols have been continuously studied for their biological 
functions  against  oxidative  damage  and  progression  of  metabolic  syndrome  in  our  laboratory.  Identification  and 
characterization of bioactive components in plant foods using state-of-the-art techniques will be introduced.  Further, dietary 
defense  strategies  against  progression  of  metabolic  syndrome  utilizing  these  bioactive  food  components  and  their  action 
mechanisms will be discussed.  

[Supported  in  part  by  USDA  1950-51000-065-08S,  USA  and  Rural  Development  Administration  PJ008755,  Republic  of 
Korea] 

 
Biography 

Kyung-Jin  Yeum, Ph.D. is  a  Scientist at the  Jean  Mayer  USDA-Human  Nutrition  Research Center  on  Aging and  Associate 
Professor at the Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy at Tufts University, a collaborative Professor at Faculdade 
de  Medicina  de  Botucatu/UNESP  in  Brazil.  Dr.  Yeum  has  been  conducting  various  in  vitro,  animal  and  human  studies  to 
determine  action  mechanisms  of  bioactive  food  components  against  oxidative  stress  in  humans.  Her  research  efforts  have 
produced more than 50 peer-reviewed articles in this area. Dr. Yeum is a member of various professional societies such as the 
American Society for Nutrition and International Carotenoid Society.   

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

