International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Spontaneous physical activity and sleep promotion for obesity prevention  
 

Abstract 

Jennifer A. Teske
Jennifer A. Teske    
Jennifer A. Teske
Jennifer A. Teske
University of Arizona, USA 
     

The  prevalence  of  obesity  continues  to  increase  despite  modifying  behavior  can  reduce  the  risk  for  obesity.    Behavioral 
modification  to  adopt  a  lifestyle  with  lower  caloric  intake,  higher  exercise  levels  and  adequate  sleep  is  difficult  in  an 
obesigenic  environment  that  promotes  highly  palatable  foods,  use  of  labor-saving  devices  and  extended  work  hours.  
Alternative behavioral modalities are needed in the arsenal of obesity treatment options.  Spontaneous physical activity (SPA) 
or all physical activity aside from formal exercise is highly variable across individuals and is higher among individuals with 
lower  body  weight.  Sub-optimal  sleep  time  is  prevalent  among  individuals.    Likewise,  reduced  sleep  time  or  sleep  quality 
increases risk for obesity. Promoting higher levels of SPA and improving sleep may curb weight gain.  However, identifying 
the  relative  contribution  of  SPA  and  sleep  on  total  energy  expenditure  to  overall  energy  balance  and  understanding  neural 
factors modulating SPA and sleep is required first. Work in a rodent model of obesity resistance demonstrates that high SPA 
levels  confer  lower  adiposity  and  this  parallels  sleep  quality.    Thus  high  SPA  levels  may  confer  protection  against  the 
deleterious  effects  of  sleep  deprivation.  The  neuromodulatory  lateral  hypothalamic  neuropeptide  orexin  may  underlie  this 
heightened SPA and sleep quality and therefore may provide an avenue for pharmacologic obesity therapeutics.  

Biography 

Jennifer  A.  Teske  completed  her  Ph.D.  in  2007  in  Nutritional  Biochemistry  at  the  University  of  Minnesota  in  Saint  Paul, 
Minnesota,  USA  and  postdoctoral  studies  in  2011  at  the  Minneapolis  VA  Health  Care  System  in  Minneapolis,  Minnesota, 
USA. Currently, she is an  Assistant Professor in the  Department  of  Nutritional  Sciences at the  University  of  Arizona  and  a 
Research Scientist at the Southern Arizona VA Health Care System in Tucson, Arizona, USA. 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

