International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Roles of immune cells in adipose tissue in obesity and insulin resistance 

Jae Bum Kim
Jae Bum Kim    
Jae Bum Kim
Jae Bum Kim
Seoul National University, Korea    
  Abstract 

Biography 

Adipose  tissue  plays  key  roles  in  whole  body  energy  homeostasis  by  cooperating  with  brain,  muscle,  liver  and  pancreatic 
islets.  In  obesity,  adipose  tissue  dysfunction  affects  systemic  insulin  sensitivity  and  eventually  leads  to  metabolic 
complications  including  hyperlipidemia,  hypertension,  hypercholesterolemia,  certain  cancers  as  well  as  type  2  diabetes. 
Recent findings have suggested that several stress responses including adipose tissue inflammation, ER stress, oxidative stress 
and  hypoxia  are  able  to  induce  adipose  dysfunction  in  obesity.  Previously,  we  have  demonstrated  that  in  adipose  tissue, 
increased oxidative stress is closely associated with adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance. In this presentation, I 
will discuss immune responses in adipose tissue of obesity as well as insulin resistance.  

Jae  B.  Kim  is  a  Professor  of  Biological  Sciences,  Biophysics  and  Chemical  Biology  at  the  Seoul  National  University.  He 
received  his  B.S.  and  M.S.  at  Seoul  National  University  in  1990.  And  he  completed  his  Ph.  D.  from  Harvard  University  in 
1996,  where  he  cloned  and  characterized  ADD1/SREBP1c,  a  key  lipogenic  transcription  factor,  under  supervision  of  Dr. 
Bruce M. Spiegelman. Then  he continued his postdoctoral fellowship  with Dr. Phillip Sharp, at MIT. In 2000, he joined the 
faculty at the Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National  University.  He has published more than 90 papers  and has 
been working on fat metabolism and its related metabolic disorders such as obesity and diabetes.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

