International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

An increase in insulin sensitivity of 3T3-L1 adipocytes induced by 
transmembrane tumor Necrosis Factor –α 

Wenjing Zhou
Wenjing Zhou    
Wenjing Zhou
Wenjing Zhou
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China     
  Abstract 

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α is a proinflammatory cytokine that links obesity and insulin resistance. However, the effect of 
transmembrane TNF-α (tmTNF-α) on insulin resistance remains unknown. Here, we demonstrated that high concentration of 
glucose(25mM)  significantly  reduced  insulin-induced  glucose  uptake  by  3T3-L1  adipocytes  that  was  concomitant  with  a 
decrease in tmTNF-α expression but an increase in soluble TNF-α(sTNF-α) secretion. This insulin resistance, however, could 
be reversed in part by neutralization of TACE using a specific antibody to prevent the cleavage of tmTNF-α into sTNF-α, as 
manifested  by  enhancement  of  insulin-induced  glucose  uptake,  pointing  out  a  possible  different  role  of  tmTNF-α  in  insulin 
resistance. Then, we stimulated 3T3-L1 adipocytes with exogenous tmTNF-α and sTNF-α respectively, and found that sTNF-
α  inhibited  insulin-induced  tyrosine  phosphorylation  of  IRS-1  and  AKT  phosphorylation,  leading  to  suppression  of  the 
glucose uptake induced by insulin. In contrast, tmTNF-α has been shown to elevate insulin-induced glucose uptake by twofold 
as a result of promoting the insulin signaling. Furthermore, we found that tmTNF-α downregulated the expression of IL-6 and 
MCP-1 through inactivation of NF-κB and upregulated the expression of adiponectin through PPAR-γ in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. 
Inhibition  of  PPAR-γ  expression  by  GW9662,  an  inhibitor  of  PPAR-γ,  could  decrease  tmTNF-α-induced  adiponectin 
transcription, blocking tmTNF-α-enhanced AKT phosphorylation and glucose uptake. These data suggest that tmTNF-α may 
contribute  to  the  improvement  of  insulin  resistance,  which  is  opposite  to  sTNF-α,  thereby  specific  blockage  of  tmTNF-α 
conversion into sTNF-α may be useful to increase insulin sensitivity for the clinical treatment of type 2 diabetes. 

Biography 

Wenjing Zhou earned her bachelor of medicine at the age of 23 years from Tongji Medical College. She is studying for her 
Ph.D in the department of Immunology, Tongji Medical College. “Mechanism of tmTNF-α improving insulin resistance” is 
her first subject, and she is writing the first paper about her research.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

