International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Physical activity in elderly obese women with type 2 diabetes 

Abstract 

Amarabalan Rajendran
Amarabalan Rajendran    
Amarabalan Rajendran
Amarabalan Rajendran
Sri Ramachandra University, C
University, Chennai, India
Sri Ramachandra 
hennai, India    
Sri Ramachandra 
Sri Ramachandra 
University, C
University, C
hennai, India
hennai, India
     

Diabetes  is  a  global  health  problem  with  significant  human,  social,  and  economic  impacts.    It  has  been  estimated  that  380 
million individuals  would be  affected  with  diabetes  worldwide  by  the  year  2025.  In  the  United  States  alone,  there  are  23.6 
million adults 20 years or older with diabetes, and approximately 90% of them have type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). People 
with diabetes are at increased risk of peripheral heart disease, congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease and myocardial 
infarction as well as a five-fold increase in sudden death, the Framingham heart study revealed. The increasing prevalence of 
T2DM is directly related to an increasing rise in the prevalence of physical inactivity and obesity. In a meta- analysis of 14 
studies,  exercise  resulted  in  a  clinically  significant  reduction  in  post  intervention  HbA1c  in  type  2  diabetic  patients.  A 
substantial proportion of  patients with type  2 diabetes do not engage in the recommended level  of physical activity. In fact, 
data shows that only 23% of older adults with type 2 diabetes reported 60 min of weekly physical activity. This is particularly 
a concern in elderly obese women in whom the range of physical activity is further restricted by their physical fitness coupled 
with high insulin resistance caused by their obesity. Data suggests that a mild increase in physical activity in this population 
would  significantly  decrease  the  morbidity  caused  by  micro  and  macro  vascular  complications  of  diabetes.  So  in  order  to 
tackle the  growing  problem  of  diabetes in  this  population,  a multifactorial approach  has  to be  undertaken by  the clinicians. 
Before implementing any pattern of physical activity or an exercise program, patients must be subjected to a detailed medical 
evaluation  with  appropriate  diagnostic  studies.    Subjects  should  be  carefully  screened  for  the  presence  of  macro  and  micro 
vascular complications that may be worsened by the exercise program. The next step should be prescribing them an exercise 
regimen, which would suit the patient based on their physical fitness. They should be strongly encouraged to lose weight. A 
major  Government  study,  the  Diabetes  Prevention  Program  (DPP),  shows  that  modest  weight  loss  of  5  to  7  percent  could 
delay  and  possibly  prevent  type  2  diabetes.  Elderly  obese  women  also  have  an  increased  prevalence  of  osteoporosis  and 
vitamin D deficiency. Evidence shows that that vitamin D deficiency is detrimental to beta cell function, and leads to glucose 
intolerance  in animal models  and humans. In Nurses Health Study – a large  prospective,  observational cohort,  women with 
the highest calcium and vitamin D intake (> 1200 mg and > 800 IU daily, respectively) had a 33% lower risk of incident type 
2 diabetes mellitus than women with the lowest calcium and vitamin D intake (< 600 mg and < 400 IU daily, respectively). A 
recent study by  Enju Liu et al showed that higher vitamin  D status was inversely associated with fasting markers  of insulin 
resistance.  Therefore  all  diabetic  women  in  the  elderly  age  group  should  be  worked  up  for  vitamin  D  deficiency  and 
supplemented if deficient, which could improve insulin sensitivity and in turn help them attain better glycemic control. After 
the implementation of the exercise regimen patient should be constantly monitored and motivated during each follow up visit. 
They  should  be  asked  to  document  their  daily  physical  activity  and  the  same  should  be  reviewed  during  the  follow-ups.  If 
possible, these patients can be assigned in to groups, which would increase their compliance. Increased physical activity also 
stimulates lipolytic activity, promotes the use of FFA as an energy source and thus helps in weight loss in this age group. A 
lot  of  these  obese  women  with  diabetes  have  co-existing  hypertension.  Increasing  the  level  of  physical  work  reduces  heart 
rate,  improves  the  sensitivity  of  aortic  baroreceptors,  peripheral  vasodilation  and  decrease  activity  of  sympathetic  nervous 
system and renin-angiotensin system, which contributes to a more efficient regulation of blood pressure. Physical activity also 
improves  quality  of  life  in  these  patients.  In  addition  to  increasing  the  level  of  physical  activity,  appropriate  medical  and 
nutrition therapy also plays a key role in attaining good glycemic control and promoting weight loss in elderly obese women. 
In summary a simple physical activity regimen tailored to  the patients  with motivational interviewing and counseling  could 
cause  a  significant  improvement  in  glycemic  control,  physical  fitness  and  quality  of  life  in  elderly  obese  women  with 
uncontrolled type 2 diabetes. 

Biography 

Amarabalan  Rajendran  has  completed  his  MBBS  at  the  age  of  22  years  from  Sri  Ramachandra  University,  Chennai  India. 
After  that  he  worked  as  a  House  officer  in  the  Department  of  Endocrinology  Diabetes  and  Metabolism,  Sri  Ramachandra 
Medical Centre. He has about nine International publications in peer reviewed Journals. He is currently in the United States 
for his Graduate medical education application and he is aspired in Pursuing Internal Medicine residency in the United States. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

