International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in type 2 diabetes 

Abstract 

Mona H. Ismail
Mona H. Ismail    
Mona H. Ismail
Mona H. Ismail
University of Dammam, Saudi Arabia 
     

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common disorder and its prevalence is expected to increase due to the rising 
incidence  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  (T2DM)  and  obesity.  Insulin  resistance  and  oxidative  stress  play  an  important  role  in 
NAFLD development and progression. NAFLD includes a wide spectrum  of liver damage, ranging from simple steatosis to 
steatohepatitis  and advanced fibrosis.  Nonalcoholic  steatohepatitis (NASH), a histological  subtype  of  NAFLD  characterized 
by  hepatocyte  injury  and  inflammation,  is  present  in  approximately  10%  of  patients  with  T2DM  and  is  associated  with  an 
increased risk for the development of cirrhosis and liver-related death. Both T2DM and NAFLD are associated with adverse 
outcomes  of  the  other;  T2DM  is  a  risk  factor  for  progressive  liver  disease  and  liver-related  death  in  patients  with  NAFLD, 
whereas  NAFLD  may  be  a  marker  of  cardiovascular  risk  and  mortality  in  individuals  with  T2DM.  Noninvasive,  simple, 
reproducible,  and  reliable  biomarkers  are  needed  to  develop  novel  therapies  for  patients  with  NASH.  Current  treatment 
strategies  aim  to  improve  insulin  resistance  via  weight  loss  and  exercise,  improve  insulin  sensitivity  by  the  use  of  insulin-
sensitizing  agents  (for  example,  pioglitazone)  and  reduce  oxidative  stress  by  the  use  of  antioxidants,  such  as  vitamin  E. 
Pioglitazone  and  vitamin  E  supplementation  show  some  promise  in  improving  liver  histology  in  patients  with  NASH. 
Bariatric surgery is gaining momentum for the treatment of obesity associated with comorbidities, such as T2DM and NASH, 
with long-term reports of reduction in overall mortality. 

Biography 

Ismail  graduated  from  the  College  of  Medicine  at  King  Faisal  University  in  1992  and  completed  her  internal  medicine 
residency  training  in  1996  and  got  her  Internal  Medicine  Board  Certification/Fellowship  in  1997.  She  then  pursued  further 
training in Canada and did two year GIT Fellowship training at McMaster Medical Center in Hamilton followed by one year 
Hepatology Fellowship training at Toronto University. She has published in several national and international journals. She is 
the only Female Hepatologist in the Saudi Arabia and neighboring Gulf countries. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

