International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Relationship of lifestyle factors on metabolic syndrome among faculty of a 
Philippine university 

    Liezl M. 
Liezl M. AAAAtienza
tienza    
Liezl M. 
Liezl M. 
tienza
tienza
University of Philippines Los Banos, Philippines    
  Abstract 

The  study  examined  the  relationship  of  lifestyle  factors  namely  food  intake,  exercise,  alcohol  consumption,  smoking  and 
stress and metabolic syndrome among faculty members in a Philippine university. A self-administered questionnaire was used 
to  gather  data  on  lifestyle.  Anthropometric  measurements  were  collected  using  standard  techniques.  Biochemical  data  were 
collected by trained health professionals and analyzed at the laboratory of the University Health Service in College, Laguna. A 
total of 100 full time faculty members selected through stratified random sampling by age served as respondents. The sampled 
faculty were classified into age groups to wit: young (20-39), middle-aged adults (40-59) and old adults (60 and above). Data 
were  analyzed  using  frequency  distribution  tables  and  spearman’s  correlation.  Results  revealed  that  the  prevalence  of 
metabolic syndrome based on NCEP ATP III criteria was 17 percent. Lifestyle factors such as intake of whole grains, sugars, 
fruits and vegetables, fish, oils and fats, and exercise had significant relationships with metabolic syndrome. Smoking, alcohol 
consumption and stress were found to have no significant relationship with metabolic syndrome. 

Biography 

Liezl M. Atienza has completed her MS Applied Nutrition minor in Biochemistry at the age of 28years from the Institute of 
Human  Nutrition  and  Food  in  the  University  of  the  Philippines  Los  Banos.  She  has  served  as  Division  Head  of  the  said 
Institute  from  2008-2011.  She  has  five  research  publications  related  to  diet  and  obesity-related  diseases.  She  is  also  a 
registered dietitian and has worked as technical assistant in nutrition to various organizations in the Philippines. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

