International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Frequency of obesity among type 2 diabetic patients attending a tertiary 
hospital in Lagos State, Nigeria 

Obesity  and  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  constitute  major  public  health  issues  in  modern  societies  worldwide.  They  have  been 
linked in several ways. Obesity is involved in the pathologic process that culminates in the development of type 2 diabetes. 

Bolajoko Aina
Bolajoko Aina    
Bolajoko Aina
Bolajoko Aina
University of Lagos, Nigeria    
  Abstract 

The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  assess  the  frequency  of  obesity  in  known  type  2  diabetic  patients  and  also  to  determine  the 
presence of comorbidities associated with these two conditions.  

The study  was carried  out at Lagos University Teaching hospital and was designed as a retrospective review of the medical 
records  of  type  2  diabetic  patients  undergoing  treatment  at  the  Hospital  for  the  year  2011.  Seventy  six  case  notes  were 
accessed. Out of the 76 case notes only 63 were used in analysis. Assessment included weight, height, age, sex, comorbidities 
present, genetic factors and duration of diabetes. 

Forty six patients (73%) were either obese (34.9%) or overweight (38.1%) while 23.8% were of normal weight. The majority 
of diabetic patients were in the age groups 50-59 and 60-69. Average BMI for obese and overweight patients were 32.73+ 
3.73 and 26.61+ 1.88 respectfully. Comorbidities such as hypertension, dyslipidaemia, retinopathy, neuropathy, renal 
impairment and ulcer were found present.  

The  study  revealed  high  prevalence  of  obesity/overweight  among  the  diabetic  patients.  Hypertension  and  retinopathy  were 
common in these patients.  

Health care professionals should encourage patients to adopt preventive measures or life style that will lead to weight loss as 
weight loss by 5% is enough to reduce the incidence of comorbidities which affect mortality and morbidity.  

Biography 

Aina BA completed her PhD in 2005 from University of Lagos. She is an Associate professor in the Department of Clinical 
Pharmacy and Biopharmacy of same University. She has published more than 30 papers in peer reviewed journals.  

Ogbo  PU  is  a  PhD  candidate  and  Assistant  Lecturer  in  Department  of  Clinical  Pharmacy  and  Biopharmacy,  University  of 
Lagos. Falade MI is about completing her Bachelor of Pharmacy from the University of Lagos 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

