International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

One-year change in energy and macronutrient intakes and, influence of 
body dissatisfaction in overweight and obese inner-city African American 
children: Results from community-based taking action together type 2 
diabetes prevention programs 

Sushma Sharma
Sushma Sharma    
Sushma Sharma
Sushma Sharma
University of California, USA    
  Abstract 

Taking  Action  Together  (TAT)  was  a  controlled  community-based  intervention  protocol  developed  to  reduce  risk  of  T2DM 
among low-income, high BMI, 9-10 year old African American children. A secondary hypothesis of this study was that there 
would  be  greater  improvements  in  the  treatment  group  in  dietary  intakes  and  physical  activity.  To  evaluate  the  objectives, 
multiple  linear  regression  models  were  employed,  with  1  year  change  in  dietary  variables  as  dependent  variables.  
Intervention group status was the independent variable of interest and BMIz was included as a covariate in all analyses. The 
analysis suggest that 1 year change in dietary intakes in boys was associated with group intervention status, with boys in the 
treatment  group  reducing  their  intakes  of  energy  and  fat  to  a  significantly  greater  extent  than  boys  in  the  control  group. 
Differences in energy intakes were not significant, however, for girls.  

Also, after adjusting for  baseline intake of dietary variables and intervention group status, baseline body  dissatisfaction was 
associated with 1-year increases in intake of energy, and all macronutrients in girls, but not in boys. These relationships were 
not substantially altered after adjusting for baseline BMIz and global self-worth (GSW). This analysis suggests that, in girls 
but not necessarily in boys, body  dissatisfaction might need to be targeted during interventions that aim to improve nutrient 
intake.  

Based  on  the  differences  in  gender  response  to  our  intervention,  we  conclude  that  interventions  designed  for  and  delivered 
only to African American girls might be more successful than those delivered in mixed gender settings. 

Biography 

Sushma Sharma is a Senior Scientist at the University of California, Berkeley. Her post-doctoral research experience includes 
conducting,  managing  and  supervising  research  in  the  areas  of  nutrition,  obesity,  type-2  diabetes  and  metabolic  health.  Her 
current  interests  are  in  nutrition  and  metabolic  health,  with  a  special  focus  on  obesity  and  type-2  diabetes  prevention 
programs.  

Sharma has published more than twenty articles in peer-reviewed journals; and has contributed to book chapters and magazine 
articles.  She  is  an  invitee  reviewer  for  more  than  ten  international  journals,  and  holds  memberships  in  several  international 
scientific organizations. She is an associate editor of two prestigious journals in Pediatrics and Nutrition research. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

