International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Preventing overweight starts early: Buffalo healthy tots 

Teresa Quattrin
Teresa Quattrin    
Teresa Quattrin
Teresa Quattrin
Women & Children‘s Hospital of Buffalo, USA    
  Abstract 

Among  preschool children  aged  2-5  years, the  prevalence  of  obesity  doubled from  5.0%  to  10.4%  over  the  past  3  decades. 
Obesity tracks throughout development and 52% of obese children 3-5 years remain obese as adults.  The risk of a child being 
obese  as  an  adult  is  a  joint  function  of  being  overweight  as  a  child  and  parental  obesity.    Family  change  towards  healthier 
habits,  modifying  the  shared  family  eating  and  activity  environment,  supporting  healthier  behaviors  and  modeling  new 
behaviors  are  important  factors  leading  to  prevention  and  treatment  of  child  overweight.    Only  limited  research  has  been 
conducted  on  early  intervention,  especially  in  the  primary  care  setting.    The  talk  will  focus  on  Buffalo  Healthy  Tots,  an 
innovative program focusing on the young child and been carried out in the primary care setting. The goal of this program is 
to test the efficacy of an innovative family-based intervention program designed for treating overweight/obese children aged 
2-5  years  and  an  overweight  parent.  We  hypothesized  that  children  and  parents  randomized  to  a  family-based  behavioral 
Intervention  would  have  greater  reductions  in percent  over body  mass index (%OBMI)  and  BMI respectively,  compared  to 
children  and  parents  randomized  to  Information  Control,  and  that  child  and  parent  adiposity  changes  would  be  positively 
correlated. The methods, including the key aspects of the program will be reviewed. Particular attention will be devoted to the 
translational aspects of the program, ongoing progress and preliminary results.   

Biography 

Teresa  Quattrin,  obtained  her  M.D.  from  the  University  of  Naples,  Italy.  She  completed  her  Pediatric  training  at  the 
University of Naples and at Women and Children’s Hospital of Buffalo (WCHOB) where she also completed a fellowship in 
Pediatric Endocrinology. She is UB Distinguished Professor and A. Conger Goodyear Chair of Pediatrics at the University at 
Buffalo, and Pediatrician-in-Chief at the  WCHOB. She continues to serve also as the Director of the Diabetes Center at the 
WCHOB, established by her in 1990, and of the Division of Endocrinology-Diabetes (since 2002). Dr. Quattrin holds board 
certifications in Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes. 

The Diabetes Center and the Division of Endocrinology have national recognition as premier clinical and research centers. Dr. 
Quattrin  has  had  a  long  standing  clinical  and  research  interest  in  pediatric  diabetes,  insulin  resistance,  obesity  and  insulin 
growth factors. Dr. Quattrin is the principal investigator for the “Type 2 Diabetes Center of Excellence” (T2DCOE) funded by 
the New York State Department of Health. The Diabetes Center is also part of the NIH sponsored “Trial Net”, a network of 
clinical  centers  working  collaboratively  to  prevent  and  slow  down  the  progression  of  type  1  diabetes;  and  the  T2  Diabetes 
Exchange,  a  large  type  1  diabetes  national  database.  Dr.  Quattrin’s  translational  research  on  prevention  and  treatment  of 
overweight  in  pre-school  children  is  supported  by  NIH.  The  current  study  is  a  randomized  clinical  trial  focusing  on  family 
based behavioral intervention delivered in the pediatric practice setting. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

