International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Fat fighting foods 

Deepa 
Deepa Agarwal
Agarwal    
Deepa 
Deepa 
Agarwal
Agarwal
Sri Ramachandra University, India 
      Abstract 

As  globalization  arrives  in  the  third  world,  so  does  the  unhealthy  western  diet.  Over  the  past  twenty  years,  poor  people  in 
developing  countries  have  greatly  increased  their  consumption  of  sweetened  beverages,  vegetable  oils  and  animal-source 
foods (meat, poultry, fish, eggs and dairy products). People in the developing world are also adopting Western lifestyles that 
contribute  to  obesity.  No  country  in  modern  times  has  successfully  reduced  its  number  of  overweight  citizens,  but 
governments  and  aid  programs  are  considering  various  interventions.  It’s  true  that  all  foods  can  be  a  possible  source  of  fat 
creation, but certain foods can help burn fat or reduce fat. Some foods contain certain vitamins or minerals that help improve 
the metabolism and improve the fat burning capacity, of the body and act as virtual fat burners. While some foods contain less 
calories while requiring more complex digestion and assimilation causing the expenditure of energy and thus acting as virtual 
calorie  burners.  Some  foods  create  a  sense  of  satiation  even  when  consumed  in  small  amounts  while  also  being  low  of 
calories. Certain means of cooking reduces the calorie profile of the food and thus helps in reduce fat creation. Eating these 
foods, in the right quantities, over a period of time will ensure that the fat profile starts reducing. When we talk about burning 
fat it also includes foods that help reduce the possibility of new fat creation, because this would indirectly help you burn fat at 
a faster pace through  your activities (like exercising). A lot of people try to starve their nutrition in a bid to reduce fat. This 
approach can have spurious effects on the harmony of the body and is not a wise or healthy way to reduce fat. The right way 
to  reduce fats  would  be to eat  foods that reduce the possibility  of further fat deposition,  or  foods that assist in  burning fats, 
while also taking up calorie-burning exercises (like aerobics, yoga and resistance/weight training) to use up the past-stored fat 
in  your  body.  Citrus  fruits,  Oats,  vegetables,  lentils,  chicken,  eggs,  almonds  and  walnuts,  salmon,  cinnamon,  garlic  and 
onions, flax  seeds  etc  are some  of the  easily  available  foods that can  help in  the process  of burning  fats  or reducing  the fat 
profile of the body.  

Keywords: Globalization, Obesity, Fat fighting foods 

Biography 

Deepa Agarwal has completed her PhD at the age of 27  years from Sri Ramachandra Medical College, one of the renowned 
medical  institutions  in  India.  Her  prime  area  of  interest  is  Paediatric  and  Critical  Care  Nutrition.  She  is  a  consultant 
Nutritionist in a leading multispecialty hospital. She has seven international publications to her credit and has attended many 
national conferences as well as international conferences.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

