International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Obesity causes and its management  

Abstract 

Harsh K Shah
Harsh K Shah    
Harsh K Shah
Harsh K Shah
Shankersinh Vaghela Bapu Institute of Pharmacy, India    
     

(cid:1)  Genetic factors 
(cid:1)  Socio-economic (lifestyle and diet) 
(cid:1)  Cultural factors 
(cid:1)  Psychological/Hormonal and medical factors  

Overweight  and  obesity  are  defined  as  abnormal  or  excessive  fat  accumulation  that  presents  a  risk  to  health.  A  crude 
population measure of obesity is the body mass index (BMI), a person’s weight (in kilograms) divided by the square of his or 
her height (in meters). A person with a BMI  of 30  or more is  generally considered  obese. A person with a BMI equal to or 
more  than  25  is  considered  overweight.  Overweight  and  obesity  are  major  risk  factors  for  a  number  of  chronic  diseases, 
including diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and cancer.  

Factors responsible for obesity: 

     Metformin is a widely used drug in the therapy of patients affected by diabetes mellitus. Although some caution is needed 
in the very old, advanced age per se does not represent a contraindication to metformin use. Experimental evidence produced 
over  the  years  suggests  that  metformin  may  be  useful  in  some  clinical  conditions  different  from  diabetes  mellitus.  In  the 
present review we have examined  currently  available  data  about the possible use  of  metformin  as an  effective therapeutical 
agent  in  pathological  conditions  different  from  type  2  diabetes  mellitus.  On  the  basis  of  our  investigation,  the  use  of 
metformin can be suggested in overweight patients affected by impaired glucose tolerance and/or fasting hyperglycemia and 
in subjects affected by polycystic ovary syndrome, while further data are needed on which I am doing research work in order 
to prescribe such a drug in patients. 

     The  Obesity  management  Program  is  one  of  the  fast  developing  programs  in  India  who  manages  overweight  &  obese 
patients.  Our  obesity  management  program  helped  more  than  3000  obese/overweight  patient  for  achieving  their  weight 
reduction goal. The weight loss program is under a physician's care. Balance education, appetite management and activity to 
lose  weight.  Learn  strategies  to  keep  weight  off  using  real  food.  This  is  not  a  quick  fix.  This  is  a  lifestyle  change.  This 
program  consists  of  experts  in  fitness  and  wellness  who  provide  diet  chart,  education,  and  resources  to  help  patient 
incorporate  fitness  into  their  life.  Our  goal  is  to  teach  patients  strategies  for  long-term  weight  loss  and  optimal  wellness  so 
that  they  have  the  tools  to  maintain  their  weight  loss.  We  incorporate  many  educational  tools  during  patient’s  weight  loss 
journey.  In this  poster  presentation  I  want  to  show  methods &  details  of  program  which  will be  remain  helpful to  different 
countries for management of overweight & obese persons. 

Biography 

I am Harsh k. Shah. I have completed my Post graduation in Pharmacy from Rajiv Gandhi University, Bangalore in 2009. I 
am  doing  my  PhD  from  Gujarat  Technological  University,  Ahmedabad.  I  am  working  as  an  Asst.Professor  at  Shankarsinh 
Vaghela Bapu Institute of Pharmacy, Gandhinagar. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

