International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Relationship between BMI, perception of weight and methods of weight 
reduction among pharmacy students of University of Lagos  

Bolajoko Aina
Bolajoko Aina    
Bolajoko Aina
Bolajoko Aina
University of Lagos, Nigeria    
  Abstract 

Obesity is associated  with  many diseases. It  is a leading cause  of death  worldwide. There  are two main  causes  of  obesity  – 
diet and lack  of physical activity. Pharmacists should advice on weight control products, eating habits, physical activity and 
healthy lifestyles, especially for patients who want to maintain their weight loss. 

This study was to determine the perception of pharmacy students (future pharmacists) on their weights and method of weight 
control. 

A modified version of CDC Youth Risk Behavior Survey questionnaire 2011 was self administered to pharmacy students who 
consented  to fill the  questionnaire.  About  450  students consented to  fill the  questionnaires  out  of  which  445  questionnaires 
were eventually used for analysis. 

Majority (70.2%) of the students described themselves as having the right weight while  only  about 1 % as very  overweight 
and 13% as slightly overweight. 

The  mean  BMI  for  those  that  described  them  as  being  very  overweight  was  34.67+  1.00  while  the  very  underweight  had  a 
mean BMI of 18.24 + 2.42. These results tally with classification of BMI. 

All  those  that  described  themselves  as  being  very  overweight  were  trying  to  lose  weight  while  about  82%  of  the  slightly 
overweight were trying to lose weight. Among the very overweight and slightly overweight, 40% and 30% went without food 
for 24 hours; 20% and 10% took diet pills; 0% and 9% vomited  or took laxatives respectively.  Only  22% of those trying to 
lose weight were involved in physical activity on all 7 days before the survey. 

Obesity  isn’t  much  of  a  problem  amongst  the  students.  The  few  that  are  overweight  should  be  encouraged  to  employ  right 
methods of weight control. 

Biography 

Aina BA completed her Ph.D in 2005 from University of Lagos. She is an Associate professor in the Department of Clinical 
Pharmacy and Biopharmacy of same University.   She has published more than 30 papers in peer reviewed journals.  

Oyerinde  OO  is  an  Assistant  Lecturer  and  a  PhD  candidate  in  the  Department  of  Clinical  Pharmacy  and  Biopharmacy, 
University of Lagos. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

