International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 
Midterm metabolic outcomes following laparoscopic roux en y gastric 
bypass 

Metabolic syndrome is a conglomeration of high risk factors that accelerate the onset of cardiovascular disease and diabetes 
and increase the chances of suffering from acute MI and stroke. The syndrome is closely linked to excess body weight and is 
known to improve and resolve following weight loss. 

Our aim was to evaluate morbidly obese patients with metabolic syndrome undergoing laparoscopic roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
(LRYGBP) for its effect on various components of the syndrome over a period of 3 years. 

Abstract 
Introduction: 

Rajesh Khullar
Rajesh Khullar    
Rajesh Khullar
Rajesh Khullar
Max Healthcare, India 
     

Objective: 

Methods:                   

A retrospective analysis of 458 patients having undergone LRYGBP from 01-01-2007 to 31-12-08 was done. Selected 
patients were diagnosed to have metabolic syndrome according to IDF guidelines. Sixty percent were females, the mean age 
of the patients was 40.25 years (range 17- 62 years), the mean BMI was 44.78Kg/m2 (range 36.73- 62.3 Kg/m2). Patients 
having any two criteria positive apart from morbid obesity were selected for the study. A hundred and eighty two patients 
were diagnosed with MS at time of surgery. These patients were evaluated on the status of the MS criteria at 12 month 
intervals following surgery. 
 
Results: 

Preoperatively 182 patients (39.9%) were diagnosed with MS. The number of patients at followup decreased from 155 (85%) 
at 12 months, 152(83%) at 24 months, to 143(78%) at 36 months. The mean reduction in BMI at 12months, 24 months and 36 
months was 28.3Kg/m2, 27.7kg/m2 and 27.8Kg/m2 respectively. The number of patients with MS decreased to 12 (7.7%) (p 
<  0.01)  at  I  year  follow  up  ,  this  improvement  persisted  in  patients  at  24  months  and  48  months  follow  up.  The  various 
components of MS vis-à-vis HT, DM, low HDL and raised Triglycerides were evaluated by measuring the blood pressure and 
drug  dosage,  HbA1C  levels  and  drug  dosage,  Serum  HDL  and  S  Triglycerides  respectively.  All  showed  improvement  or 
resolution.  
 
Conclusion: 

The incidence of MS is high in the obese population. Following laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass MS is seen to resolve 
or significantly improve. This improvement correlates well with the weight loss of patients. There is also improvement seen 
in all components of MS. 
 
Biography 

Rajesh  Khullar,  graduated  from  Armed  Force  Medical  College,  Pune,  India  (AFMC)  in  1979  and  MS  in  General  Surgery 
from PGI, Chandigarh in 1983. Dr. Rajesh Khullar is a Senior Consultant Surgeon at Institute of Minimal Access, Metabolic 
and  Bariatric  Surgery  at  Max  Healthcare,  New  Delhi  (India).  He  is  Honorary  Secretary  -  Hernia  Society  of  India  (HSI)  - 
National Chapter of Asia Pacific Hernia Society (APHS), Treasurer – Obesity & Metabolic Surgery Society of India (OSSI) 
and Executive Member & Past Vice-President – Indian Association of Gastrointestinal Endosurgeons (IAGES). He has been 
actively  involved  in  training  of  young  surgeons  from  India  and  abroad.  He  has  contributed  his  profession  expertise  in 
compiling,  streamlining  and  editing  the  scientific  content  of  the  manual  titled  “Minimal  Access  Surgery  –  Guidelines  & 
Recommendations”  and  Co-author  of  the  text-book  on  “Endohernia  repair”.  He  is  accredited  faculty  of  National  Board  of 
Examinations for post-doctoral fellowship in minimal access surgery and Ethicon Institute of Surgical education, New Delhi. 
He is a member of various national and international societies. He has been conducting conference and workshops in Minimal 
access surgery in various cities. He is actively involved in publishing articles in National & International journals.    

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

