International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Early results of Roux-en-Y gastric by-pass on regulation of diabetes type 2 
in patients with BMI above and below 35 kg/m2 

Monika Proczko
Monika Proczko    
Monika Proczko
Monika Proczko
Medical University of Gdansk, Poland    
  Abstract 

The idea of surgical treatment  of type 2 diabetes  was established in the U.S. and  was based  on observation of patients after 
bariatric operations. Performed in cases of morbid  obesity exclusion of the duodenum and anastomose the stomach with the 
central  part  of  the  intestines  cause  shortened  absorbtion  of  nutrients,  what  showed  a  beneficial  effect  on  weight  loss, 
resolution  of comorbidities  and reduce  the risk  of  developing cardiovascular  diseases and  cancer.  Analysis  of the results  of 
surgical treatment of obese patients with type 2 diabetes (DM2) confirmed the usefulness of surgical methods. 

The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  Roux-en-Y  gastric  by-pass  (RYGB)  on  diabetes  in  patients  with  BMI 
below and above 35 kg/m2 . 

Material and methods: The study comprised 66 patients with DM2, who underwent Roux-en-Y gastric bypass due to morbid 
obesity (BMI above 35 kg/m2) and three patients with DM2 and BMI below 35 kg/m2.  In patients with DM2 and BMI < 35 
kg/m2  criteria  for  inclusion  in  the  operational  treatment  were:  DM2  difficult  to  be  regulated  pharmacologically  lasting  less 
than  10  years  and  BMI  at  the  qualification  about  35  kg/m2  .  Indications  have  been  determined  on  the  basis  of  three 
consecutive  measurements  of  HbA1c  values  above  7%,  and  measurements  of  blood  glucose  (frequent  fluctuations  in  blood 
glucose levels on the value of hypoglycemia to hyperglycemia). 

Results:  The criteria for diagnosing resolution of  DM2 included the level of  HbA1c < 6% and glucose fasting  level  below 
100 mg/ dl. In a group of 66 patients with DM2 and obesity, regression of DM2 was observed in 48 patients (73%) as early as 
during  the  hospitalization.  In  11 patients  (16.7%)  glycaemia and  HBA1c  were stabilized within 8  weeks after surgery. In 7 
(10.6%) cases of patients with difficult to control DM2, there was still need for antidiabetic medication, but glycemic control 
was much more effective. After one year remission was observed in 89% of patients. In all three patients with DM2 and BMI 
<  35  kg/m2  total  glycemic  resolution  of  DM2  was  observed  during  hospitalization.  In  this  group  there  has  been  no 
postoperative complications. In the group of 66 obese patients with DM2 postoperative complications were found in 7 cases, 
they were related to infection and prolonged healing of surgical wound. One patient had an intraabdominal abscess located in 
the left subphrenic region, it was punctured under ultrasound guidance. 

Conclusions:  The  ultimate  evaluation  of  this  method  demands  several  years  of  meticulous  clinical  studies.  Despite  of  that, 
considering  high  cost  of  life-long  conservative  therapy  of  DM2  and  its  complications,  severe  impact  on  quality  of  life  and 
serious  consequences  of  the  disease,  the  surgical  metabolic  intervention  may  become  the  most  resonable  solution  in  many 
cases. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

