International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Obesity and dementia  

Deborah R. Gustafson
Deborah R. Gustafson    
Deborah R. Gustafson
Deborah R. Gustafson
State University of New York, USA    
  Abstract 

Anthropometric measures of obesity, such as Body Mass Index (BMI) and waist circumference or waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) 
are linked to clinical dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) in epidemiological studies. Overweight and obesity, measured 
as  BMI  or  WHR,  in  mid-  and  late-life  may  increase  risk  for  dementia,  whereas  decline  in  body  weight  or  BMI,  and 
subsequent  underweight  in  the  years  preceding  and  at  the  time  of  dementia  diagnosis  may  relate  to  dementia.  The  role  of 
adipose  tissue  during  these  periods  of  life  in  relation  to  later  and  concurrent  risk  for  cognitive  decline  and  dementia  is  not 
understood. Biological mechanisms linking adipose tissue to the aging brain and neurocognitive symptoms may be related to 
interactions between peripheral and central metabolism. Hypotheses relating adipose tissue to cognitive decline and dementia 
may  relate  to  the  peripheral  and  cerebral  vasculature;  actions  of  adipose  tissue  hormones  (adipokines),  such  as  leptin  and 
adiponectin,  and  adipose  tissue-related  hormones,  such  as  ghrelin,  on  brain  regions  that  are  important  for  neurocognition; 
adipose tissue effects on energy metabolism; change in adipose tissue morphology over time; and genetic susceptibility based 
on  the  identification  of  genes  important  for  both  adipose  tissue  and  the  brain.  Given  the  ubiquity  of  adipose  tissue  and  its 
multi-functionality, metabolic implications over the life course on health of the aging brain and dementia risk are great. The 
purpose  of  this  presentation  is  to  overview  the  epidemiology  of  anthropometric  measures  and  dementia,  and  to  discuss 
potential underlying mechanisms of action whereby adipose tissue influences neurocognitive processes in the brain. 

Biography 

Deborah Gustafson received her degrees in Biology, Nutrition Science, and Nutritional Epidemiology from the University of 
Minnesota. After a postdoctoral fellowship in Genetic Epidemiology, in 1996, Dr. Gustafson held two faculty positions in the 
U.S. She moved to Sweden in 2004 to work with the Neuropsychiatric Epidemiology Unit at the University of Gothenburg. In 
2009, she moved to Brooklyn where she is Visiting Professor of Neurology and Medicine at State University of New York - 
Downstate Medical Center.  Dr. Gustafson has received numerous research grants, has published over 100 papers and book 
chapters, and is involved in several multinational collaborations.   
 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

