International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Disruption of intraflagellar transport in leptin receptor-Expressing neurons 
leads to obesity via transcription 3 signaling  

Yi Wang
Yi Wang    
Yi Wang
Yi Wang
University of California, USA    
  Abstract 

The  primary  cilium  is  a  cellular  organelle  that  serves  as  a  signaling  hub  for  most  vertebrate  cells  including  neurons.    The 
assembly of the primary cilium depends on intraflagellar transport (IFT), and the mutations disrupting the IFT process result 
in loss  of cilia.  Disruption  of the  primary cilium results in obesity in both humans and mice, but the  molecular  mechanism 
underlying  this  phenotype  remains  to  be  elucidated.  It  is  well  known  that  leptin,  a  fat-derived  hormone,  exerts  pleiotropic 
effects  on  energy  balance  and  neuroendocrine  functions.  Mice  defective  in  leptin  or  its  receptor  [leptin  receptor,  isoform  b 
(LepRb)] exhibit severe obesity, infertility, and reduced linear growth. LepRb activates the transcription factor Stat3 and this 
signaling  is  required  for  leptin  regulation  of  energy  balance  but  not  reproduction  and  linear  growth.To  investigate  the 
contribution of the primary cilium to leptin regulation in vivo, we generated mice in which IFT was disrupted specifically in 
LepRb neurons after the onset of leptin receptor expressions, which resulted in loss  of primary cilia in  LepRb neurons.  We 
showed that the mutant mice were hyperphagic and severely obese, but with increased linear growth and normal fertility. The 
mutant mice also developed impaired glucose tolerance and leptin resistance at an early age.  Furthermore, the leptin induced 
Stat3 response was impaired in mutant mice independently of obesity.  Our results suggest that the primary cilium is required 
for LepRb-Stat3 signaling to regulate energy balance, but not to regulate fertility and linear growth. 

Biography 

Yi  Wang  has  completed  her  PhD  from  the  University  of  Sydney,  Australia,  and  is  doing  her  postdoctoral  training  in  Dr 
Vaisse’s lab the University of California, San Francisco. Dr Vaisse’s laboratory has described the first gene mutations causing 
human obesity.  This laboratory has also studied the molecular determinant of this leptin-melanocortin pathway and was the 
first  to  determine  the  essential  role  of  signal  transducer  and  activator  of  transcription  3  (Stat3)  signaling  through  the  leptin 
receptor for the maintenance of long-term energy homeostasis. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

