International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Oral administration of insulin-like growth factor-I from colostral whey 
reduces blood glucose in STZ induced diabetic mice 

Kyung
Kyung----A Hwang
A Hwang    
Kyung
Kyung
A Hwang
A Hwang
National Academy of Agricultural Science, Republic of Korea    
  Abstract 

Of the people diagnosed with type II diabetes, over 80 percent are also diagnosed as obese. This fact provides an interesting 
clue  to  the  link  between  diabetes  and  obesity.  Understanding  what  causes  the  disease  will  hopefully  allow  us  to  prevent 
diabetes  and  obesity  in  the  future.  So,  we  are  interested  to  explore  effectively  natural  products  as  potential  treatments  for 
diabetes and obesity simultaneously.  

The  aim  of  the  present  study  was  to  investigate  the  effects  of  oral  administration  of  the  insulin-like  growth  factor-I-rich 
fraction  (IGF-I-RF)  from  bovine  colostral  whey  on  the  regulation  of  blood  glucose  levels  in  streptozotocin  (STZ)-induced 
diabetic  mice.  We  obtained  a  peptide  fraction  containing  IGF-I  from  colostrum  within  24  h  after  parturition  by  using 
ultrafiltration. The blood glucose levels of STZ-induced diabetic mice fed with IGF-I-RF were significantly reduced by 33% 
at 4 weeks. And we evaluated the effects of the IGF-I-RF on blood insulin and tissue TAG levels in the STZ-induced diabetic 
group.  In  the  result,  blood  insulin  levels  significantly  increased  in  the  IGF-I-RF  group  compare  to  the  control  group.  In 
addition, intracellular concentrations of TAG decreased by 16% in the liver of IGF-I-RF treated mice compared with those in 
STZ-induced diabetic mice.  

The body weights of STZ-induced diabetic mice increased following the oral administration of the IGF-I RF. The kidney and 
liver weights of STZ-induced diabetic mice decreased significantly following the administration of the IGF-I-RF. The present 
results  indicate  that  the  IGF-I-RF  obtained  from  colostrum  could  be  a  useful  component  for  an  alternative  therapeutic 
modality for the treatment of diabetes and obesity in insulin-resistant patients.  

Biography 

Kyung-A  Hwang  completed  her  PhD  at  2004  year  from  Sungkyunkwan  University  in  Republic  of  Korea  and  Postdoctoral 
Fellow studies from Yale University School of Medicine. Currently, she has been working in Functional Food and Nutrition 
Division, National Academy of Agricultural Science, senior researcher. Dr. Hwang’s main area of research is the correlation 
of obesity, diabetes and the immune system. Currently, she is focusing on the development of new molecular bio-markers for 
obesity-related. She has published various renowned journals such as Journal of Immunology(2007, 2008), Critical Reviews 
in Immunology(2008), Mechanisms of ageing development(2009) , Food Chemistry(2011) etc. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

