International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Robot-assisted sleeve gastrectomy for obese and super obese patients – 
Initial experience in South America 

Eduardo Pirolla
Eduardo Pirolla    
Eduardo Pirolla
Eduardo Pirolla
University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Brazil    
  Abstract 

Background:  Vertical  Sleeve  gastrectomy  is  a  safe  and  feasible  approach  for  the  treatment  of  morbidly  obese  patients. 
Laparoscopic method is THE principal technique used in the most part of the surgeons all the World. Laparoscopic Vertical 
Sleeve  gastrectomy  (LSG)  is  sometimes  also  a  valid  option  as  a  first  stage  of  bariatric  surgical  procedure  for  super-super 
obese patients. Robot-assisted sleeve  gastrectomy (RASG) was started as  a possible  option for the  same specific conditions 
and proposes, However, a lot of questions remain about its safety, high cost, surgeons and all team training, Herein we present 
our  initial  experience  with  RASG  in  a  group  with  a  good  experience  with  robot  surgery,  doing  highly  complex  procedures 
including robot assisted hepatectomy, duodenumpacreatectomy, esophagectomy and others.  We then analyzed and compared 
ours results with those in the international literature.  

Methods: A prospectively review of database about our 11 patients underwent to RASG was performed. Independent validity 
includes patient’s demographics, operative parameters, morbidities, time and conditions follow-up, surgical time, and time of 
out hospital. The outcomes after RASG were compared to the laparoscopic technique.  The patients were recruited in a private 
clinic of the surgeons. Inclusions criteria were BMI between 35 – 45 Kg/m2, morbidities as diabetes type 2 more than 10 years 
in oral treatment and without control, hypertension in oral treatment too,  moderate or severe liver steatoses  diseases and lipid 
diseases.  Exclusion  criteria  were  BMI  <  35  and  >  45  kg/m2,  severe  heart  disease  (Class  IV  NYHA)  or  severe  pulmonary 
disease, age > 70 years and refuse to sign informed consent.   

Results: All patients in a both of groups (laparoscopic and robot approach) had a effective loss of weight, with mean about 25 
kg  to  48  kg  (25%  to  55%)  after  one  year  period.  One  case  of  robot  approach  presented  a  staple  line  bleeding  at  first 
postoperative  day,  without  transfusion.  Morbidity  rate  after  RASG  was  9%,  but  no  gastrointestinal  leaks  occurs.  In 
laparoscopic  approach  mean  operative  time  was  93  minutes  and  in  RASG  was  115  minutes.  No  mortality  or  differences  in 
hospitality stay was detected. 

Conclusions:  RASG  can  be  a  safely  and  feasible  tool  to  the  surgical  treatment  of  obese  patients  and  co-morbidities,  with 
good results and satisfactory  outcomes. However, the effective decisions and indications, acceptable advantages of this new 
technology require more trials and long time follow-up. 

Biography 

Pirolla  finished  medical  school  in  1988  and  his  training  in  surgery  in  1993  at  the  faculty  of  Medicine,  University  of  Sao 
Paulo(USP), Brazil. He  did his PhD at the Faculty of Medicine, USP, where he is Associate professor  of Human Anatomy, 
Department of Surgery. Surgeon Staff Chief of the Syrian-Lebanese Hospital and Albert Einstein Hospital in Sao Paulo. He 
was  Associate  Professor  of  Surgery  at  Heart  Institute-  USP  for  13  years.  Graduated  in  Principles  and  Practise  of  Clinical 
Research  at  Harvard  Medical  School  and  HMS  Postgraduate  Member.  It  has  several  scientific  articles  and  book  chapters 
published. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

