International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Reasons for revisional surgery following laparoscopic adjustable gastric 
banding  

Introduction: 

Rajesh Khullar
Rajesh Khullar    
Rajesh Khullar
Rajesh Khullar
Max Healthcare, India    
  Abstract 

Materials n Methods: 

Laparoscopic  adjustable  gastric  banding  (LAGB)  is  popular  for  its  simplicity  and  reversibility.  However  long  term  (band 
related) complications and poor weight loss outcomes often result in revision of the band. We review the underlying causes 
and presentations for band revision in our practice and the perioperative outcomes.  

The practice of Bariatric surgery at our centre began with the laparoscopic adjustable gastric band in 2003. We reviewed the 
followup of patients having undergone LAGB between December 2003 and December 2005. Patients undergoing revisional 
surgery  following  LAGB  were  studied  for  causes  of  band  removal.  The  physical  signs  and  symptoms  leading  upto  the 
revisional  surgery  were  evaluated.  Perioperative  morbidity  and  weight  loss  following  revisional  surgery  were  assessed. 
Follow up following revisional surgery was 5 to 37 months. 

Results: 

As on March 2012, out of 118 patients, 30 patients (25.4%) had had their bands removed. Twenty nine patients (24.5%) had 
an additional revisional  bariatric procedure either simultaneously  or 6-12 weeks following band removal. The age and  body 
mass index (BMI) of patients undergoing revisional surgery ranged 24 to 62 years and 29 to 57 Kg/m2 respectively. Twenty 
three  patients  underwent  a  laparoscopic  roux  en  Y  gastric  bypass  and  laparoscopic  sleeve  gastrectomy  was  performed  in  6 
patients.All  procedures  were  completed  laparoscopically.  The  band  was  removed  in  19  patients  due  to  weight  regain,  8  of 
these patients had esophageal dilatation and in 5 patients the band had eroded into the stomach. Of the remaining 11 patients  
7  patients  had  inadequate  weight  loss,  2  patients  developed  band  slippage  and  gastric  prolapse  and  in  2  patients  the  band 
leaked. The mean excess weight loss (EWL) at 3 months  was  23+ 7.4% and at 6 months was  34+14.9%.  The  overall mean 
weight  loss  was  53.8%  (range  46  to  68%).  There  was  no  major  morbidity  or  mortality.  There  were  7  (33.3%)  minor 
complications. All patients except one were discharged 2 days following surgery. One patient 62 year old female     (revised 
to LSG) was discharged 5 days following surgery due to poor oral intake. She also required blood transfusion postoperatively 
due to fall in hemoglobin levels.    

Conclusion: 

 Laparoscopic  adjustable  gastric  banding  may  require revision  due to  inadequate  weight  loss  or band related  complications. 
Revisional procedure following reversal of gastric banding can be safely performed laparoscopically. Weight loss following 
revisional surgery is lower than that reported for the same procedure as a primary surgical option.  

Biography 

Rajesh  Khullar,  graduated  from  Armed  Force  Medical  College,  Pune,  India  (AFMC)  in  1979  and  MS  in  General  Surgery 
from PGI, Chandigarh in 1983. Dr. Rajesh Khullar is a Senior Consultant Surgeon at Institute of Minimal Access, Metabolic 
and  Bariatric  Surgery  at  Max  Healthcare,  New  Delhi  (India).  He  is  Honorary  Secretary  -  Hernia  Society  of  India  (HSI)  - 
National Chapter of Asia Pacific Hernia Society (APHS), Treasurer – Obesity & Metabolic Surgery Society of India (OSSI) 
and Executive Member & Past Vice-President – Indian Association of Gastrointestinal Endosurgeons (IAGES). He has been 
actively  involved  in  training  of  young  surgeons  from  India  and  abroad.  He  has  contributed  his  profession  expertise  in 
compiling,  streamlining  and  editing  the  scientific  content  of  the  manual  titled  “Minimal  Access  Surgery  –  Guidelines  & 
Recommendations”  and  Co-author  of  the  text-book  on  “Endohernia  repair”.  He  is  accredited  faculty  of  National  Board  of 
Examinations for post-doctoral fellowship in minimal access surgery and Ethicon Institute of Surgical education, New Delhi. 
He is a member of various national and international societies. He has been conducting conference and workshops in Minimal 
access surgery in various cities. He is actively involved in publishing articles in National & International journals.    

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

