International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Obesity among older adults: Can the use of body mass index alone result in 
an incomplete diagnosis? 

Abstract 

    Shahla Wunderlich
Shahla Wunderlich    
Shahla Wunderlich
Shahla Wunderlich
Montclair State University, USA  
     

There  are  many  predictions  that  the  number  of  obese  adults,  including  the  elderly,  will  increase  in  the  coming  years.  
However,  the  most  recent  report  in  the  Journal  of  American  Medical  Association  (JAMA)  indicated  that  in  2009-2010,  the 
prevalence of obesity (based on Body Mass Index (BMI)) was 35.5% among adult men and 35.8% among adult women, with 
no significant change compared with 2003-2008.   The 35.5% figure is still a  very high figure and a  2009-2010 CDC report 
revealed that39.7% of older adults (60+) were obese. The prevalence of obesity among older adults causes several health and 
mobility  complications  to  the  patient,  in  addition  to  a  financial  burden  to  the  society.  Today  obesity  is  diagnosed  primarily 
based  on  BMI  and  while  this  is  a  valuable  measure,  studies  suggest  that  other  factors  such  as  body  composition,  fat 
distribution and movement assessment are important to include in a complete diagnosis. Obesity in older adults is linked to 
many chronic diseases including Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cancer osteoarthritis, and coronary heart disease. Aside from 
chronic  diseases,  obesity  in  older  adults  has  also  been  linked  to  a  loss  of  independence.    Obesity  in  combination  with  low 
muscle strength in the elderly years has been shown to decrease walking speed and result in greater risk of physical disability. 
It is therefore imperative that health professionals and academic researchers be engaged in determining the most accurate total 
set of tools (not only BMI) to assess overweight and obese individuals and to work to mitigate this widespread disorder. 

 

Biography 

Shahla Wunderlich is currently Professor of Nutrition and Food Science at Montclair State University. Dr. Wunderlich 
received the Ph.D. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in Nutritional Biochemistry and 
Metabolism.  She has received several grants, including from the US Department of Health and Human Services, to provide 
nutrition education, counseling and physical activity for older adults. Her research findings about maintaining wellness for 
older adults, and maternal and child nutrition have been published and presented at national and international professional 
meetings. She has received many awards, including the Outstanding Dietetic Educator Award from the American Dietetic 
Association.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

