International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Direct action of obesity-inducing antipsychotics on human adipocytes 

Nira Ben
Nira Ben----Jonathan
Jonathan    
Nira Ben
Nira Ben
Jonathan
Jonathan
University of Cincinnati, USA    
  Abstract 

Atypical  antipsychotics  (AAP)  are  prescribed  to  millions  of  patients  worldwide  with  schizophrenia,  bipolar  disorder,  major 
depression, and autism. In spite of their ability to ameliorate many mental problems, AAP have serious metabolic side-effects, 
including substantial weight gain, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. The primary therapeutic target of AAP 
are  dopamine  (DAR)  and  serotonin  (5-HTR)  receptors.  The  mechanisms  underlying  the  metabolic  side  effects  of  AAP  are 
unknown, but have been attributed to their central action. We discovered expression of functional DAR and 5-HTR subtypes 
in  human  adipose  tissue.  Incubation  of  adipose  explants,  primary  adipocytes  and  human  adipocyte  cell  lines  with  selected 
AAP suppressed leptin and adiponectin, and increased basal and isoproterenol-stimulated lipolysis. Treatment of female rats 
with  olanzapine  caused  a  85-90%  suppression  of  leptin  and  adiponectin,  and  a  4-fold  increase  in  interleukin-6  (IL-6) 
expression in fat tissue within 24 hrs, concomitant with increased food intake and weight gain in 2-3 days. We conclude that 
direct activation of DAR and 5-HTR subtypes in adipose tissue underscores peripheral actions of AAP which complement, or 
override,  their  central  actions,  leading  to  weight  gain  and  the  metabolic  syndrome.  Given  the  millions  of  patients  who  are 
chronically  treated  with  AAP,  most  pharmaceutical  companies  are  developing  new  drugs  in  this  class.  Human  adipocytes 
could be integrated into the screening paradigms  of candidate drugs for the identification  of undesirable metabolic activities 
prior to costly animal studies and clinical trials. This investigation also identified a potential novel target for the treatment of 
obesity.   

Biography 

Nira  Ben-Jonathan  has  published  165  manuscripts,  edited  one  book,  and  contributed  12  chapters  to  textbooks  and 
encyclopedias. Early in her career she studied the neuroendocrine regulation of pituitary functions while the current focus of 
her research is on breast cancer, adipose tissue and human obesity. She was awarded the NIH Research Career Development 
Award, was elected Fellow of the AAAS, elected Chairman of the Gordon Research Conference, and received the Rieveschl 
Award  for  Outstanding  Scientific  Research.  She  has  been  a  member  on  numerous  committees,  serving  as  chairman  on  five 
NIH study sections. 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

