International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Extra body fat and breast cancer risk   

Reza Hakkak
Reza Hakkak    
Reza Hakkak
Reza Hakkak
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, USA    
  Abstract 

Obesity  has  been  epidemic  in  the  US  for  over  two  decades.  Obesity  has  been  linked  to the  risk  of  development  of  various 
cancers,  including  breast  cancer  both  in  pre  and  postmenopausal  women.  Previously,  we  have  reported  that  obesity  is  risk 
factor for breast cancer development using  DMBA-induced mammary tumor model. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is an 
over-the-counter  dietary  supplement  used  as  an  anti-cancer  agent  and  anti-obesity  supplement.  The  objectives  of  this  study 
were  to  investigate  the  long-term  effects  of  obesity  using  obese  zucker  rat  as  model  and  DHEA  treatment  on  body  weight 
gain, breast cancer development and also serum DHEA, DHEA-S, IGF-1and IGFBP-3 using 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene 
(DMBA)-induced  mammary  tumor  model.  We  used  43  six-week-old  obese  female  Zucker  rats  and  we  randomly  assigned 
them  ad  libitum  to  a  diet  either  chow  as  a  control  diet  or  chow  with  the  addition  of  DHEA  at  a  concentration  of  6  g/kg  of 
chow as a DHEA diet. We induced mammary tumors by orally gavaging all of the rats at age 50 days with 65 mg DMBA/kg 
body  weight  and  were  sacrificed  155  days  post-DMBA  treatment.  Fifty-five  percent  (55%)  of  the  control  diet  group 
developed mammary  tumors,  while  no  tumors  were  detected  in the  DHEA  diet  group  (P<0.001). Obese rats  fed the  DHEA 
diet  gained  significantly  less  weight  (P<0.001)  and  had  an  increased  (P<0.001)  serum  DHEA  and  DHEA-S  compared  to 
control  rats.  Also,  obese  DHEA-Fed  rats  had  significantly  (P<0.001)  lower  serum  IGF-1  and  IGF-BP3.  Our  results  suggest 
that  DHEA  treatment  can  reduce  body  weight  gain  by  lowering  serum  IGF-1  and  IGFBP-3  which  might  protects  against 
breast  cancer  development  caused  by  obesity.  Also,  these  results  suggest  that  extra  body  fat  can  be  a  risk factor  for  breast 
cancer development and by losing the extra body fat, the risk of breast cancer development can be eliminated. Supported by 
ABI to RH. 

Biography 

Reza  Hakkak  is  working  as  a  faculty  member  University  of  Arkansas  for  Medical  Sciences,  is  a  nutritionist,  Professor  and 
Chairman of the Department of Dietetics and Nutrition in the College of Health Related Professions, Professor of Pediatrics in 
the College of Medicine, and Professor of Maternal Child Health in the College of Public Health. His research is primarily in 
the areas of basic nutrition science research and nutrition education. His basic nutrition research interests include the influence 
of nutrition on cancer prevention, the influence of obesity on cancer promotion, and the effects of differing diets and nutrition 
on  chemical carcinogenesis. For  past 10  years,  his research  interests  have focused  on  links  between  obesity, diet and breast 
cancer promotion. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

