International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Choosing an operation for surgical treatment of obesity 

Abstract 

MMMMALALALAL    FobiFobiFobiFobi    
Center for Surgical Treatment of Obesity, USA 
     
 

Biography 

Surgical  treatment  of  Obesity  currently  provides  the  only  viable  longterm  control  of  obesity,  particularly  morbid  obesity. 
Surgical operations have evolved from the intestinal bypass operations to gastric bypass, gastroplasty, gastric banding, sleeve 
gastrectomy and biliopancreatic diversion with and without switch operations. 

The choice of an operation for control of obesity should be based on the risk benefit ratio and the long term effectiveness of 
the  operation  since  obesity  is  a  lifelong  condition.  No  one  operation  is  effective  on  all  patients  in  all  cases.  However  an 
operation chosen should effect greater than 50% excess weight loss in greater than 75% of the patients maintained for at least 
five years
with less than 10% peri operative morbidity and less than 1% peri operative mortality. The operation should lack 
unpreventable long term serious morbidity (Liver, Kidney). Informed choice by the patient, the expertise (training, experience 
and geographical Location) and preference of the Surgeon, the cost of the operation, need and extent of support and follow up 
and the co-morbid conditions of the patient must be considered. Gastric bypass is the gold standard of obesity operations. My 
choice  for  surgical treatment  is  the banded  gastric  bypass,  a modification  of the  gastric  bypass,  because  it provides the best 
weight loss to  more patients that is  maintained for the  longest  time.  The  various surgical operations  will be presented     and 
evidence to support the choice of the banded gastric bypass as the primary obesity operation will be presented and discussed. 

MAL Fobi is a board certified general surgeon, specialized in bariatric surgery. He is the Medical Director of the Center for 
Surgical Treatment of Obesity in Hawaiian Gardens California. He has served as the President of the International federation 
for obesity and Metabolic Surgery (IFSO) and President of the California chapter of the American Society for Metabolic and 
Bariatric  Surgery  (ASMBS).  He  has  published  extensively  on  bariatric  surgery,  lectures  internationally,  serves  on  many 
editorial boards and a member of several national and international medical societies.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

