International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Role of leptin and insulin on renal sympathetic nerve activity in high fat fed 
rabbits 

Abstract 

Geoffrey A. Head
Geoffrey A. Head    
Geoffrey A. Head
Geoffrey A. Head
Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Australia 
     

Using  a  rabbit  model  of  obesity  induced  hypertension  we  have  shown  that  a  3  week  consumption  of  a  high  fat  diet  (HFD) 
induces  elevated  blood  pressure  (BP),  heart  rate,  renal  sympathetic  nerve  activity  (RSNA)  and  plasma  norepinephrine. 
Ganglion blockade completely abolishes the increase in blood pressure suggesting that this model of obesity hypertension is 
neurogenic.  The  changes  are  associated  with  elevation  in  plasma  insulin  and  leptin  which  may  be  the  basis  for  the 
development of long term obesity related hypertension. We found that 3 weeks of a HFD induces an increased sensitivity to 
the central sympatho-excitatory effects of leptin and also alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH). We determined that 
the  increase  in  BP  and  RSNA  occur  relatively  quickly  being  detectable  within  24  hours  of  commencing  the  diet.  Also  the 
main  reason  for  the  increases  is  the  loss  of  pre-prandial  reduction  in  cardiovascular  measures.  To  determine  the  central 
mechanisms,  we  administered  conscious  rabbits  with  intracerebroventricularly  (ICV)  peptide  antagonists  of  Leptin  and 
Insulin. The insulin antagonist lowering BP slightly but had no effect on RSNA. By contrast leptin antagonist ICV abolished 
the  hypertension  and  reduced  RSNA.  The  antagonists  had  no  effect  in  control  rabbits.  We  conclude  that  increased  RSNA 
associated with a HFD is due almost entirely to enhanced leptin signaling in the hypothalamus via MSH pathways.  

Biography 

Geoffrey Head is a Principal Research Fellow of the NH&MRC, Head of the Neuropharmacology Laboratory at the BakerIDI 
Heart  and  Diabetes  Institute  and  adjunct  Professor  at  Monash  University.  Research  interests  include,  the  understanding  of 
mechanisms  involved  in  the  control  of  the  heart  and  circulation  by  the  central  nervous  system  and  its  role  in  hypertension, 
heart  failure  and  obesity.  He  has  published  over  200  scientific  papers  and  is  editor  in  chief  of  “Frontiers  in  Integrative 
Physiology”  He was Secretary  of the High Blood Pressure Research Council of Australia from 2005-10 and is treasurer for 
the International Society of Hypertension meeting in Sydney 2012.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

