International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Glycemic index of selected Nigerian foods for obese people  

Olabisi Akinlua
Olabisi Akinlua    
Olabisi Akinlua
Olabisi Akinlua
Moshood Abiola Polytechnic Ojere Abeokuta, Nigeria    
  Abstract 

This research work was carried out to determine the glycemic index of beans product. Four beans product (Beans served with 
stew,  Akara,  Moinmoin  and  Ofuloju)  from  the  same  cowpea  specie  (Vigna  unguiculata)  with  different  processing  methods 
(boiling, steaming, frying) were evaluated .50g Oral  glucose – D was used as standard food. Mineral analysis and  glycemic 
index were determined using AOAC 2002.  

A total of ten (10) healthy volunteers were used in the study. The volunteers consist of three (3) males and seven (7) males. 
Socio – demographic, Body  Mass Index (BMI)  of the subjects were assessed using a structured questionnaire and  weighing 
scale respectively. A total of four beans products namely; Beans served with stew, Akara, Moinmoin and Ofuloju were given 
to the subjects after which blood sample was collected using a glucometer (on-call-plus). 

The  result  of  the  socio  economic  characteristic  shows  that  the  age  of  the  subjects  ranged  from  30-23  years,  Height  ranged 
from 1.57-1.48m, weight ranged from 45-69kg while their BMI were between 19.57 – 31.36 kg/m2. .The result of the mineral 
analysis showed that Moinmoin had the highest iron content (5.7) while Akara had the lowest content (0.02), Akara had the 
highest Magnessium content (3.5) while beans served with stew had the lowest Magnessium content (2.9). Beans served with 
stew  had  the  highest  zinc  (0.05)  while  Akara  had  the  lowest  zinc  content  (0.02).  The  Glycemic  Index  (GI)  of  beans  served 
with  stew  was  56,  akara  was  44,  moinmoin  was  41  while  ofuloju  was  54.The  GI  results  revealed  that  bean  product  can  be 
recommended for obese patients. 

Biography 

Olabisi Akinlua completed her Master of Science (MSc) studies in Food Technology at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria and 
a  post  graduate  Diploma  in  Maternal  &  Child  Nutrition  from  International  Agricultural  Centre,  Netherlands.  Former  Dean, 
School  of  Pure  and  Applied  Sciences  of  Moshood  Abiola  Polytechnic,  Abeokuta,  Nigeria.  A  Chief  Lecturer  of  Food 
Technology Department, she is about completing her Ph.D at Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta. She is a fellow of 
the Nigerian Institute of Food Science & Technology and a member of the Nutrition Society of Nigeria. She has to her credit 
over ten academic published papers in reputed journals. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

