International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Prevalence of body weight disorders among nurses in Vhembe and 
Capricorn Districts, Limpopo, South Africa  

DDDDaniel 
aniel T Goon
T Goon    
aniel 
aniel 
T Goon
T Goon
University of Venda, South Africa    
  Abstract 

In South Africa (SA), anecdotal evidence concerning the prevalence of overweight and obesity in nurses is alarming, but no 
scientific  studies  have  confirmed  this  notion.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  determine  the  prevalence  of  underweight, 
overweight and obesity among 153 nurses aged 19->50 years practicing in Vhembe and Capricorn districts, Limpopo, South 
Africa. Participants were selected by purposive sampling from five hospitals in the region. Height and weight were measured 
using standard procedures. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated by dividing weight (kg) by the square of the height (m2). 
Participation  in  physical  activity  was  assessed  by  report.  The  WHO  criteria  determined  BMI  categories.  Mean  BMI  of  the 
nurses  was 31.7±18.1  kg  m-2.  Weight and BMI increased  with age  among the nurses.  The  prevalence  of  underweight (BMI 
<18.5 kg m-2), overweight (BMI ≤ 25-29.9),  obesity (BMI  ≥ 30 kg m-2) and extreme obesity (BMI  ≥ 30 kg  m-2) were 2.0%, 
27.5%,  44.4%  and  7.2%,  respectively.  The  underweight  (BMI  <18.5  kg  m-2)  rate  was  low  (2.0%).    The  prevalence  of 
overweight  and  obesity  rose  with  age,  peaking  at  ages  30-39  for  overweight  and  ≥50  for  obesity.  The  study  revealed  high 
prevalence  of  overweight  and  obesity  among  nurses  in  Vhembe  and  Capricorn  districts,  a  rate  comparable  to  the  general 
population  in  South  Africa.  Future  studies  identifying  risk  factors  for  prevalence  of  overweight  and  obesity  in  nurses  are 
needed. 

Biography 

Daniel  T  Goon  is  a  Lecturer  at  Centre  for  Biokinetics,  Recreation  and  Sport  Science,  University  of  Venda,  Thohoyandou, 
South  Africa.  His  research  interests  include  body  composition  assessment  and  physical  fitness  testing.    He  is  a  level  II 
accredited International Society for the Advancement of Kinantropometry (ISAK II). He has authored and co-authored more 
than 54 scientific publications in peer-reviewed journals and a reviewer to several journals. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

