International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

The role of dietary fatty acids in the lipid metabolism of the liver and 
adipose tissue 

Ana Maria Lottenberg    
Ana Maria Lottenberg
Ana Maria Lottenberg
Ana Maria Lottenberg
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil    
  Abstract 

Hepatic  steatosis,  or  non-alcoholic  fatty  liver  disease  (NAFLD),  is  a  pathophysiological  condition  characterized  by  fat 
deposition  in  the  liver  in  patients  without  a  history  of  alcohol  abuse.  NAFLD  is  currently  identified  as  the  hepatic 
manifestation  of  metabolic  syndrome,  which  is  associated  with  insulin  resistance  and  central  obesity.  NAFLD  is  associated 
with  undesirable  and  detrimental  changes  in  lifestyle  and  is  frequently  a  consequence  of  high  fat,  high  caloric  diet 
consumption and physical inactivity as well, as demonstrated in insulin-resistant individuals. Steatosis was also observed in a 
long-term  study  conducted  in  LDLR  knock-out  (KO)  mice  submitted  to  a  high  fat  diet,  and  the  liver  fat  accumulation  was 
similar  with  polyunsaturated  and  saturated  fatty  acids.  Independent  of  the  type  of  fatty  acids  in  the  diet,  a  high  fat  diet 
strongly induces fat deposition in the liver.  It is important to note that steatosis can be successfully reversed as demonstrated 
in obese mice with metabolic syndrome after switching to a normal fat diet. 

The main fatty acid sources of liver triacylglycerols and plasma lipoproteins in NAFLD patients are non esterified fatty acids 
(NEFAs)  derived  from  adipose  tissue  lipolysis.  De  novo  lipogenesis  (DNL)  also  contributes  significantly  to  hepatic  fat 
accumulation.  In  the  fasting  state,  26%  of  liver  triacylglycerol  in  NAFLD  patients  were  derived  from  de  novo  lipogenesis, 
which  is  several-fold  greater  than  the  5%  observed  in  healthy  subjects.  However,  NAFLD  patients  failed  to  increase 
lipogenesis  postprandially  in  response  to  a  high  fat  diet,  suggesting  that  their  lipogenic  capacity  has  reached  the  threshold. 
Westerbacka  et  al.  investigated  the  main  genes  that  were  significantly  up-regulated  in  the  fatty  liver  of  insulin-resistant 
subjects  with  NAFLD.  They  found  an  increase  in  genes  involved  in  fatty  acid  trafficking,  synthesis  and  storage  as  well  as 
inflammation, such as PPAR-γ 2, the monocyte-attracting chemokines (i.e., MCP-1) and macrophage inflammatory protein-1 
alpha  (MIP-1(cid:1))  and  four  genes  associated  with  fatty  acid  metabolism  acyl-CoA  synthetase  long-chain  family  member  4 
(ACSL4), fatty acid binding protein (FABP4 and FABP5) and LPL. Curiously, among these genes, PPAR-γ2, FABP and LPL 
are  normally  expressed,  especially  in  adipose  tissue.    The  implications  of  the  dietary  fatty  acids  regarding  the  majority  of 
these  genes  will  be  discussed.  Regarding  adipose  tissue,  dietary  fat  remarkably  takes  part  both  in  the  phospholipid 
composition of the adipocyte membranes and in the modulation of transcription of different genes involved in the processes of 
lipolysis and lipogenesis. Moreover, fatty acids greatly influence adipocyte regulation, as they affect the secretion of different 
adipokines  and  inflammatory  biomarkers.  High  fat  diet  consumption  is  related  to  elevated  triacylglycerol  concentrations  in 
adipose  tissue,  induction  of  metabolic  stress,  increases  lipolysis  and  exacerbation  of  adipokine  signaling.  All  of  these 
situations culminate in an important inflammatory process.  Additionally, western type diets are related to insulin resistance, 
greater adipose tissue fatty acids release and less glucose uptake elicited by an imbalance between cytokines and macrophage 
infiltration. An increase in plasma triacylglycerol concentration leads to ectopic fat deposition, especially in muscle, liver, and 
pancreas, thereby enhancing lipotoxicity and cellular apoptosis. The main mechanisms concerning the effects of dietary fatty 
acids on adipocyte metabolism are summarized. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

