International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Novel insights into the regulation of alternative NF-kB pathway: A 
promising step towards understanding obesity associated disorders 

Abstract 

Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu    
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu
University of Cincinnati, USA    
      

Obesity has been a growing health concern, which has been associated with several inflammatory and metabolic disorders as 
well  as  cancer.  NF-kB  signalling  has  been  associated  with  various  diseases  such  as  inflammatory  and  metabolic  disorders. 
Although  significant  insight  has  been  gained  in  our  understanding  of  the  classical  NF-kB  pathway  and  its  association  with 
obesity-induced inflammation, the role of alternative NF-kB pathway in these processes has remained elusive. Recently, it has 
been  shown  that  NF-kB  inducing  kinase  (NIK)  plays  an  essential  role  in  obesity  induced  glucose  intolerance  and  that  the 
hepatic levels of NIK are elevated in obese mice. How obesity induces the levels of NIK and the mechanism by which NIK 
levels are regulated  has remained unclear. Therefore it is essential to study the  mechanism by  which hepatocyte NIK levels 
are regulated. Importantly,  it  remains to be studied  whether loss  of control  over  cellular NIK levels  would result in  glucose 
intolerance.  Recent  findings  indicated  that  TNF  receptor  associated  factors  (TRAF)  TRAF3,  TRAF2  and  cIAP  play  an 
important role in negatively regulating the alternative pathway by controlling the turnover of NF-kB inducing kinase (NIK), 
an essential kinase in the alternative NF-kB pathway. In resting cells TRAF3 forms a bridge between NIK and TRAF2-cIAP2 
complex via its TRAF domain. In this complex cIAP2 acts as a E3 ubiquitin ligase that mediates K-48 linked ubiquitination 
of  NIK  leading  to  the  proteasome  dependent  degradation  of  the  latter.  Deletion  of  TRAF3  or  TRAF2  or  cIAP  disrupts  the 
NIK-TRAF3-TRAF2-cIAP  complex  that  results  in  NIK  stabilization  and  constitutive  activation  of  the  alternative  pathway. 
Interestingly,  as  mentioned  above,  obese  mice  displayed  higher  levels  of  NIK  in  the  liver.  It  is  interesting  to  investigate 
whether  obesity  facilitates  NIK  to  escape  degradation  by  TRAF3-TRAF2-cIAP  complex  and  whether  loss  of  hepatocyte 
TRAF3  or  TRAF2  or  cIAP would result  in  glucose  intolerance  and/or  enhance  other  inflammatory  and  metabolic  disorders 
induced  by  obesity.  Collectively,  it  appears  that  tight  regulation  of  the  alternative  pathway  is  essential  to  prevent 
inflammatory  and  metabolic  disorders  induced  by  obesity  and  that  targeting  this  pathway  would  be  beneficial  in  the 
prevention of obesity induced disorders.  

Biography 

Sivakumar  Vallabhapurapu  (Siva)  is  a  Assistant  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Cancer  and  Cell  Biology,  University  of 
Cincinnati,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  USA.  He  completed  his  graduate  training  in  2004  at  the  University  of  Karlsruhe,  Karlsruhe, 
Germany,  and  was  a  postdoctoral  fellow  at  the  Fritz  Lipmann  Institute  for  Age  Research  in  Jena,  Germany  and  at  the 
University of California, San Diego. At UCSD he worked with Dr. Michael Karin (one of the world’s leading scientists in the 
study  of  cellular  signaling  pathways)  and  worked  on  regulation  of  NF-kB  signaling.  Siva  has  published  very  high  impact 
papers  in  journals  such  as  Nature  Immunology,  Science,  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine  etc.,  and  has  also  contributed 
significantly to the field of NF-kB signaling by writing a review on NF-kB signaling in the immune system, published in the 
journal Annual Reviews of Immunology.  

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

