International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Causes for childhood obesity and the strategies for prevention 

    Jalli Hemamalini
Jalli Hemamalini    
Jalli Hemamalini
Jalli Hemamalini
Koneru Lakshmaiah University, India    
  Abstract 

Overweight and obesity in childhood show a negative impact on both physical and psychological health. The  mechanism  of 
obesity  development  is  not fully  understood and it is believed to  be  a  disorder  with multiple causes.  Environmental factors, 
lifestyle  preferences, and  cultural environment to  name a  few,  will influence  in the  rising prevalence  of  obesity  worldwide. 
Obesity is an excess proportion of total body fat. A person is considered obese when his or her weight is 20% or more above 
normal  weight.  The  most common measure of  obesity is the Body  Mass Index (BMI). A person is considered overweight if 
his or her BMI is between 25 and 29.9; a person is considered obese if his or her BMI is over 30.On the other hand, there are 
supporting evidences that excessive sugar intake by soft drink, increased portion size, and steady decline in physical activity 
have  been  playing  major  roles  in  the  rising  rates  of  obesity  all  around  the  world.  Both  over-consumption  of  calories  and 
reduced physical activity are involved in childhood obesity.  

Almost  all  researchers  agree  that  prevention  could  be  the  key  strategy  for  controlling  the  current  epidemic  of  obesity. 
Prevention  may include primary  prevention  of  overweight  or  obesity, secondary  prevention  or  prevention  of  weight  regains 
following  weight  loss,  and  avoidance  of  more  weight  increase  in  obese  persons  unable  to  lose  weight.  Until  now,  most 
approaches have focused on changing the behavior of individuals in diet and exercise. Prevention may be achieved through a 
variety  of  interventions  like  targeting  built  environment,  physical  activity,  and  diet.  The  increased  risk  of  chronic  diseases 
requires effective strategies to promote health, facilitating the adoption of proper life styles from childhood. 

Biography 

Jalli  Hemamalini  has  completed  her  PG  in  Food  Science  and  Nutrition  from  Sri  Venkateswara  University,  Tirupathi,  AP, 
India and postgraduate Diploma in Nutrition & Dietetics from Sri Padmavathi University. She has 18 years of experience in 
teaching  and  administration.  She  worked  as  Lecturer  for  Food  Science  &  Nutrition  in  UG  programme.  She  was  a  former 
Principal for the NRI Junior, College, Vijayawada and G V R & S Degree & PG College, Guntur. At present she was working 
as Assistant Professor and Nutritionist in “Koneru Lakshmaiah University”, Vijayawada, AP, India. And she was pursuing 
her PhD in Bio Technology. She attended for National Seminars and presented her papers. Recently in Feb 2012 she attended 
for a National Seminar on Obesity in India.   

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

