International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Obesity prevention and control strategies in Latin American and United 
States Latino populations 

Abstract 

Eduardo J. Simoes
Eduardo J. Simoes    
Eduardo J. Simoes
Eduardo J. Simoes
University of Missouri School of Medicine, USA 
     

Latinos are the largest and fastest growing ethnically diverse group in the U.S.; they are also the most overweight. Mexico is 
now second to the U.S. in suffering the worst epidemic of obesity in the world. Objectives of this study were to: 1) Conduct a 
systematic  review  of  obesity-related  interventions  targeting  Latinos  living  in  the  U.S.  and  Latin  America;  and  2)  Develop 
evidence-based recommendations to inform culturally relevant strategies targeting obesity. 

Obesity-related interventions, published between 1965 –2010, were identified through searches of major electronic databases. 
Selection  criterion  included:  evaluation  of  obesity-related  measures,  intervention  conducted  in  a  community  setting,  with  a 
sample of at least 50% Latino/Latin American participants, or with stratified results by race/ethnicity.  

Body of evidence was based on number of available studies, study design, execution, and effect size. Of 19,786 articles, 105 
interventions  met  final  inclusion  criteria.  Interventions  promoting  physical  activity  and/or  healthy  eating  had  strong  or 
sufficient evidence for recommending: (1) school-based interventions in the U.S. and (2) Latin America; (3) interventions for 
overweight or obese children in the healthcare context in Latin America; (4) individual-based interventions for overweight or 
obese adults in the U.S.; (5) individual-based interventions for adults in Latin America; and (6) healthcare-based interventions 
for overweight or obese adults in Latin America.  

Biography 

Eduardo  J.  Simoes  MD,  MSc,  MPH  has  completed  his  medical  degree  from  Faculdade  de  Medicina,  Universidade  de 
Pernambuco  (Brazil,  1981),  Master  of  Science  in  Community  Health/Diploma  of  Hygiene  and  Tropical  Medicine  from 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of London (England, 1987), and Master of Public Health from 
Emory  School  of  Public  Health,  Emory  University  (United  States,  1991).  Dr.  Simoes  is  the  chairman  and  distinguished 
professor  of  the  Dept.  Health  Management  and  Informatics,  School  of  Medicine,  University  of  Missouri.  He  has  published 
more than 80 papers in reputed journals and serving as an editorial board member of repute.   

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

