International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Sagittal abdominal diameter (SAD) – visceral fat measure and 
cardiovascular risk predictor 

Edita Stoki
Edita Stokicccc    
Edita Stoki
Edita Stoki
University of Novi Sad, Serbia    
  Abstract 

Obesity implies increased body weight due to the enlargement of the adipose tissue to the extent that impairs health. There is 
a strong correlation  between the central  (abdominal) type  of obesity  and the  cardiovascular  and  metabolic diseases.  Several 
anthropometric indicators of abdominal obesity have been developed to measure abdominal adipose tissue mass. Some studies 
have  proved  that    SAD  is  a  good  predictor  of  abdominal,  especially  visceral,  fat  mass,  as  well  as  of  cardiometabolic  risk. 
Many  authors  have  suggested  specific  cut-off  values  for  SAD  that  corresponded  with  cardiovascular  and  metabolic  risk  or 
with  visceral  fat  area  obtained  by  CT.  In  order  to  investigate  relationship  between  SAD  and  anthropometric  and 
cardiovascular risk factors, we used methodology based  on rough set theory applied to table–organized data  with producing 
decision rules in the If -Then form. Our study included 1334 subjects aged 43.49±10.43 years. Our results revealed connection 
between SAD and cardiovascular risk factors which showed dependence on age and nutrition level.  We primarily recommend 
application of SAD in the assessment of the cardiovascular risk in overweight and obese individuals. SAD values ≥24.3 cm in 
overweight and obese subjects older than 41 years should correspond to increased risk, while values <24.3 cm in overweight 
subjects  younger  than  41  years  could  point  to  healthy  metabolic  profile.  Screening  for  body  fat  distribution  by  using  SAD 
combined with the examination of the decision rules in obese and preobese persons may be beneficial in identifying high risk 
patients and prevention of both metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease. 

Biography 

Edita  Stokić,  MD, PhD,  Professor  of Endocrinology,  Medical  Faculty,  University  of  Novi Sad, Serbia.  Author/coauthor  of 
320 publications, coauthor of “Practical guide for obesity treatment”, Practical guide for cardiovascular risk factors treatment” 
and “Practical guide for treatment lipid and lipoprotein disorders”.  

National SCOPE Fellow (Specialist Certification of Obesity Professionals in Europe), 2005.  

Education  and  training:  Diabetes  Expert  Forum,  (Marseille,  France)  2012,  Obesity  Management  Course  for  Clinicians 
working in the field of Diabetes” - IOTF  SCOPE (Prague, Czeh Republic), 2004, CMEF Cardiometabolic education Forum 
(Paris,  France),  2005,  Postgraduate  Clinical  Endocrinology  Course  (European  Federation  of  Endocrine  Society,  Geneva, 
Switzerland),  1995    

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

