International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

    

The impact of subtle neuro-developmental difficulties on childhood obesity 

Samuel Stein
Samuel Stein    
Samuel Stein
Samuel Stein
University of Bedfordshire, UK    
  Abstract 

A  large  number  of  young  people  with  subtle  neuro-developmental  difficulties  are  referred  to  child  and  adolescent  mental 
health services each year due to concerns about emotional and behavioural problems. Whilst they often fail to meet the strict 
diagnostic  criteria  for  a  particular  diagnosis,  these  young  people  present  with  substantial  elements  of  ADHD,  Autism, 
Dyslexia, Dyspraxia, OCD and Tics.  

The  difficulties  which  these  young  people  experience  relate  predominantly  to  the  way  in  which  they  process  complex 
sequences  of  internal  and  external  information.  This  includes  their  processing  of  somatic  sensations  including  taste.  Young 
people with subtle processing problems therefore often struggle with unhealthy eating and obesity. 

One difficulty is their tendency to fussy eating. They often have a very limited food repertoire, do not like different food items 
touching on their plate or having any sauces on their food. The other difficulty is their limited ability to track body sensations 
including feelings of hunger or satiation. 

Children  with  subtle  processing  problems  can  therefore  be  much  focussed  on  specific  brands,  often  foods  that  are  highly 
processed. They tend to eat impulsively, both in terms of volume and when they want to eat. In addition, as they struggle to 
conceptualise feelings of fullness, they tend to eat by sight or according to the amount of food available. 

This  paper therefore explores how  young  people  with subtle neuro-developmental difficulties find  issues  around eating and 
food  confusing  and  overwhelming,  which  then  acts  as  a  foundation  for  childhood  obesity  and  lifelong  habits  of  unhealthy 
eating. 

Biography 

Samuel  Stein  is  an  Attending  in  Child,  Adolescent  and  Family  Psychiatry.  He  graduated  from  the  University  of  the 
Witwatersrand  Medical  School  in  1986,  and  undertook  his  psychiatry  training  in  Oxford,  Cambridge  and  at  St.  Mary's 
Hospital  in  London.  Prof  Stein  is  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Psychiatrists  and  has  edited  several  books  including: 
Disorganized Children. He is also a Visiting Professor at the Institute for Health Research at the University of Bedfordshire 
and  the  Post-Graduate  Medical  Institute  at  Anglia  Ruskin  University.  Prof  Stein  has  a  commitment  to  service-oriented 
research and many of his initiatives have been implemented nationally as examples of accessible and effective good practice.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

