International Conference and Exhibition on
Obesity & Weight Management

December 3-5, 2012  DoubleTree by Hilton Philadelphia, USA

  

Obesity-2012

 

Effects of weight loss pharmacotherapy on vascular function in humans with 
obesity-hypertension  

William G. Haynes
William G. Haynes    
William G. Haynes
William G. Haynes
University of Iowa, USA    
  Abstract 

Obesity  is  associated  with  sympathoactivation,  hypertension,  and  atherosclerosis.  It  is  not  known  whether  increased 
sympathetic  neural  outflow  translates  into  exaggerated  sympathetically  mediated  vasoconstriction  in  obesity,  nor  whether 
weight loss can reduce the impact of obesity and hypertension on sympathetic tone and resistance vessel function. 

We  assessed  sympathetic  tone  in  humans  by  measuring  forearm  vasodilatation  to  intra-arterial  administration  of  the  alpha-
adrenergic  receptor  antagonist  phentolamine,  and  by  recording  microneurographic  sympathetic  nerve  activity  to  muscle 
(mSNA). Obese and hypertensive subjects demonstrated increased mSNA. However, vasodilatation to phentolamine was not 
augmented  in  obese  normotensive  and  hypertensive  subjects  versus  lean.  Intriguingly,  lean  hypertensives  had  markedly 
augmented  sympathetic  vasoconstrictor  tone.  Obese  subjects  then  underwent  a  3-month  weight  loss  program  using  the 
intestinal lipase inhibitor, orlistat (but with no change in physical activity). Weight loss of approximately 10% reduced mSNA 
and  BP,  but  did  not  alter  vasodilatation  to  phentolamine.  We  tested  forearm  resistance  vessel  function  using  intra-arterial 
nitroprusside (nitric oxide donor) and isoproterenol (beta-adrenergic receptor agonist). Dilatation to both was blunted only in 
obese hypertensive subjects. Orlistat-induced weight loss normalized the response to nitroprusside but not to isoproterenol in 
obese hypertensive subjects.  

Thus, resistance vessel sympathetic tone is not increased in obesity despite higher mSNA. This dissociation could be due to a 
different  target  of  sympathoactivation.  In  contrast,  hypertensive  subjects  without  obesity  have  exaggerated  sympathetically-
mediated vascular tone. Obesity without hypertension does not impair resistance vessel function in humans. However, obesity 
plus hypertension causes vascular smooth muscle dysfunction, which is improved by pharmacologically-induced weight loss. 

Biography 

William  G.  Haynes  is  a  Professor  of  Internal  Medicine  at  the  University  of  Iowa  (Divisions  of  Endocrinology  and 
Cardiology). Dr. Haynes’s NIH-funded research focuses on the mechanisms of hypertension and vascular damage in obesity. 
He provided the first description of the sympathoexcitatory effects of leptin. He has published over 150 papers, reviews and 
book  chapters.  Dr.  Haynes  is  a  member  of  the  American  Society  for  Clinical  Investigation,  has  won  awards  from  the 
International  Society  of  Hypertension,  and  the  American  Heart  Association,  and  was  Associate  Editor  of  Arteriosclerosis, 
Thrombosis and Vascular Biology. 

http://omicsonline.org/obesity2012 

