 

Ying Bao, ScD, MD 
Dr. Bao is Associate Epidemiologist at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and 
Instructor in Harvard Medical School. She has conducted extensive research 
in determining the role of insulin resistance and dysregulated energy 
metabolism in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal cancer and other chronic 
diseases, through a comprehensive and integrative application of nutrition, 
biomarkers, genetics, and metabolomics.  
 
Dr. Bao has also led large studies exploring the health benefits of nuts on 
chronic diseases, including a landmark study demonstrating that regular nut 
consumption is associated with reduced overall mortality as well as mortality 

due to cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other chronic diseases. In the past decade, Dr. Bao has 
led or contributed generously to important national and international collaborative endeavors, and has 
contributed high quality first- and senior-authored publications in such journals as The New England 
Journal of Medicine, Journal of the National Cancer Institute, and American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 
 
Tree nuts and cardiovascular mortality 
Accumulating evidence indicates that nut consumption may have various health benefits.  In a recent 
large cohort study, we found that people who ate nuts on a daily basis lived longer than those who did 
not. The greatest benefit was seen for cardiovascular mortality.  People who ate nuts five or more 
times a week had a 29% reduction in deaths from heart disease. These findings are consistent with a 
wealth of observational and clinical trial data to support health benefits of nuts on cardiovascular 
disease.  Possible mechanisms include antiatherogenic, antiinflammatory, and antioxidant properties 
of nutrients in nuts, such as unsaturated fatty acids, tocopherols, and phytochemicals.  Indeed, studies 
show that nut consumption has beneficial effects on intermediate markers of cardiovascular disease, 
including lowering LDL cholesterol and ameliorating endothelial function. Overall, the existing data 
strongly suggest that frequent nut consumption protect against cardiovascular disease. 
 

1.  Evaluate current literature on tree nut consumption and cardiovascular mortality 
2.  Understand different epidemiologic methods used in this research area 
3.  Discuss potential biological mechanisms underlying this association  
 

Learning objectives: 

 

 

11 
 

