 

Mònica Bulló, PhD 
Mònica Bulló obtained a degree in Biology from the University of Barcelona 
(UB) and a Ph.D. by the Rovira i Virgili University with the award of Honours 
Thesis Ph.D.  She occupied research positions, first in the Municipal Medical 
Research Institute (IMIM) in Barcelona, and in the Biomedical Research Center 
at the Hospital Sant Joan de Reus. Until now she has occupied various 
teaching and research positions at the University Rovira i Virgili (URV). Since 
2005, she has been a Lecturer Professor in the Department of Biochemistry 
and Biotechnology-URV (Human Nutrition Unit).   

 
Her main lines of research include: 1) Mechanisms involved in pathophysiology of obesity, 2) 
Expression of adipokines and their relationship to metabolism, obesity and metabolic syndrome, 3) 
Effect of Mediterranean diet on cardiovascular risk factors, diabetes prevention and bone metabolism, 
4) Effect nutrients on body weight, glucose tolerance and lipid metabolism, 5) Effect of nuts on 
inflammatory and oxidative parameters, 6) Effect of glycemic index and glycemic load on body weight, 
inflammation and endothelial function, 7) Satiety control through food structures made by novel 
processing; 8)Effect of pistachio intake on insulin resistance and T2D; 9) Dietary modulation of gut 
microbiota and its implication on health.  Throughout her scientific career as research staff she has 
participated in the design and conduction of various research projects, being principal investigator on 
several national and international projects. In 2005 she obtained a scholarship in the program "State 
of Research outside Catalonia (2004BE 00018) "of the Generalitat de Catalunya which allowed her a 
stay of 7 months and starting a line of collaborative research in the Neuroendocrine & Obesity Biology 
Unit (Professor P. Trayhurn - University of Liverpool, UK).  Mònica Bulló has published more than 110 
original papers in national and international journals with a cumulative impact factor, according to the 
SCI, greater than 480, with more than 95 publications in the top quartile of their specific area. 
Mònica Bulló, PhD a,b,c 
 
Tree nuts as part of a Mediterranean diet in diabetes 
aHuman Nutrition Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Spain, bIISPV (Institut d’Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili) Universitat 
Rovira i Virgili, Spain, cCIBERobn (Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
Nutrición), Institute of Health Carlos III, Spain. 
 
Background. The role of nuts on lipid profile and cardiovascular disease is well-recognized, however 
their potential role on glucose and insulin metabolism and the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is less 
conclusive.  Description. In the PREDIMED study, we analyzed the effect of a Mediterranean Diet 
supplemented with nuts in the prevention of T2D. In a randomized crossover clinical trial on pre-
diabetic subjects, we analyzed the effect of pistachio intake on glucose and insulin metabolism, both 
at peripheral and cellular levels.  Outcomes. A significant lower risk to develop T2D was observed in 
subjects following a Mediterranean Diet supplemented with nuts compared to a low-fat diet. 
Additionally, a significant improvement in fasting glucose and insulin circulating levels, and also an 
amelioration of other biochemical markers related with glucose metabolism and inflammation, was 
observed after pistachio consumption.  Conclusions. Nut consumption in a context of a healthy diet, 
is emerging as a useful nutritional strategy for the prevention of T2D.  
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  Cross-sectional and prospective studies showed controversial results according to the relation of 

nuts with insulin resistance or type 2 diabetes 

2.  The PREDIMED trial provided evidence that nut consumption can be a nutritional strategy for 

3.  The EPIRDEM trial showed beneficial effects of pistachio consumption on insulin and glucose 

diabetes prevention. 
metabolism in pre-diabetic subjects, both at peripheral and cellular levels.  

 

12 
 

