 

Joan Sabaté, MD, DrPH 
Joan Sabaté is Professor of Nutrition and Epidemiology at Loma Linda 
University’s School of Public Health.  From Spain, Dr. Sabaté is a board 
certified physician in internal medicine.  In 1989 he obtained the degree of 
Doctor of Public Health in Nutrition from Loma Linda University and 
became a faculty in the Department of Nutrition.  From 1997 to 2013 he 
served as Chair of the Department. 
 
Dr. Sabaté was principal investigator in the study that directly linked the 
consumption of walnuts to significant reductions in blood serum 
cholesterol.  His landmark findings were published in the New England 
Journal of Medicine and received the attention of nearly 400 media 

sources, both national and international.  Bringing the research full circle Archives of Internal Medicine 
has recently published the findings of his pooled analysis of 25 intervention trials establishing the 
benefits of nut consumption on blood lipid levels and lowering the risk of heart disease. He is currently 
the co-principal investigator on the Walnuts and Healthy Aging Study (the WAHA Study), a dual-center 
clinical trial with Hospital Clinco in Barcelona that includes 700 subjects. 
 
Dr. Sabaté is frequently asked to speak at scientific symposia as well as health and nutrition 
conferences throughout the United States, Europe and Asia.  He has been published in many 
scientific journals both as principal and co-author and is the editor of the book Vegetarian Nutrition 
published in 2001.  He also served as chairman for the Sixth International Congress on Vegetarian 
Nutrition held on the campus of Loma Linda University in February 2013. 
 
Tree nuts in the management of obesity, diabetes, and cardiometabolic risk 
A major finding of the Loma Linda University based Adventist Health Study was to link, for the first 
time, nut consumption to reduced risk of coronary heart disease. Results from ensuing observational 
studies and randomized intervention trials have confirmed the protective effect of nuts for CHD and 
beneficial effects on several coronary risk factors.  This session will focus on the most current 
research conducted on nut intake, diabetes and cardiometabolic risk factors. Results from published 
and unpublished work from the Adventist Health Study-2, a large longitudinal study of 96,500 
participants, which have examined this relationships will be reported.  In this presentation we also will 
explore certain underlying mechanisms through which nuts can positively modify these cardiovascular 
disease risks.  Finally, evidence regarding the recommendation of incorporating nuts into the usual 
diet and the concerns of their unwanted effect on body weight over time will be discussed.  
 

1.  To review most current research on the relationship between nut intake, diabetes and cardio-

Learning objectives: 

metabolic risk factors. 

2.  To describe mechanisms through which nuts can positively modify cardiovascular risk factors. 
3.  To summarize the evidence regarding recommendation of incorporating nuts into the usual diet and 

the concerns of their unwanted effect on body weight over time. 

 

 

 

13 
 

 

