 

Sheila G. West, PhD 
Sheila West is Professor of Biobehavioral Health and Director of the 
Vascular Health Interventions Laboratory at the Pennsylvania State 
University. Trained at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the 
Ohio State University, she joined the faculty at Penn State in 1999. Dr. West 
leads an interdisciplinary research team that conducts randomized clinical 
trials examining effects of nutrition and psychological stress on blood 
pressure and vascular function. The goal of her research program is to 
identify foods and nutrients that enhance vascular function and reduce 
blood pressure responses to stress. Dr. West’s work has been published 
in Hypertension, Current Atherosclerosis Reports, Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and other biomedical 

and psychological journals. Her recent studies have examined the effects of omega-3 fatty acids, 
pistachios, walnuts, dairy foods, and soy on vascular endothelial function and blood pressure 
responses to acute stress.  
 

Katherine A. Sauder, PhD 
Katherine Sauder earned her doctorate at The Pennsylvania State 
University in 2014 under the mentorship of Dr. Sheila West. Her graduate 
research focused on understanding the effects of pistachios on 
cardiovascular risk factors in adults with type 2 diabetes, and examining the 
association between overall diet quality and vascular function in older 
adults. She has experience in both epidemiology and clinical trials, and has 
used a variety of techniques to assess vascular function including flow-
mediated dilation, peripheral arterial tonometry (EndoPAT), and pulse wave 
velocity. She is currently a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, where she is extending her work in nutrition and 
diabetes to dietary prevention of gestational diabetes in pregnancy 

 
 
Tree nuts and cardiovascular risk factors in diabetes 
Cardiovascular disease continues to be the leading cause of death among individuals with type 2 
diabetes, and management of vascular health is vital to reducing risk even after blood sugar control is 
achieved. Relatively few studies have examined the benefits of nut consumption on vascular health in 
type 2 diabetes, particularly in regard to systemic hemodynamics, endothelial function, and arterial 
stiffness. This presentation will provide an overview of these vascular measures, including relation to 
cardiovascular risk and techniques for assessment. We will review recent work demonstrating the 
effects of nut consumption on vascular function, including a 10-week controlled-feeding study for 
adults with type 2 diabetes that tested a low-fat diet and a moderate-fat diet containing pistachios. 
Last, we will highlight current gaps in the literature and discuss opportunities for future research. 
 
 

Learning objectives: 

Understand the role of systemic hemodynamics, endothelial function, and arterial stiffness in 
cardiovascular risk 
Understand techniques for assessing these vascular health markers 
Learn how nut consumption may affect vascular health in diabetes 

 

1. 

2. 
3. 
 
 

 
14 
 

