 
 

Steven N. Blair, P.E.D. 
Steven N. Blair is Professor in the Departments of Exercise Science and 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the Arnold School of Public Health, 
University of South Carolina.  Dr. Blair is a Fellow in the American College 
of Epidemiology, Society for Behavioral Medicine, American College of 
Sports Medicine, American Heart Association, and American Kinesiology 
Academy; and was elected to membership in the American Epidemiological 
Society.   
 
Dr. Blair is a past-president of the American College of Sports Medicine 
(ACSM), National Coalition for Promoting Physical Activity, and the 
American Kinesiology Academy.  Dr. Blair is the recipient of three honorary 
doctoral degrees--Doctor Honoris Causa degree from the Free University of 

Brussels, Belgium; Doctor of Health Science degree from Lander University, U.S.; and Doctor of 
Science Honoris Causa, University of Bristol, UK.   He has received awards from many professional 
associations, including a MERIT Award from the National Institutes of Health, ACSM Honor Award, 
Population Science Award from the American Heart Association, and is one of the few individuals 
outside the U.S. Public Health Service to be awarded the Surgeon General's Medallion.  He has 
delivered lectures to medical, scientific, and lay groups in 48 states and 50 countries.  His research 
focuses on the associations between lifestyle and health, with a specific emphasis on exercise, 
physical fitness, body composition, and chronic disease.  He has published over 550 papers and 
chapters in the scientific literature, and is one of the most highly cited exercise scientists with over 
31,000 citations to his body of work.  He was the Senior Scientific Editor for the U.S. Surgeon 
General's Report on Physical Activity and Health.   
 
Cardiorespiratory Fitness and Diabetes: A Review of the Epidemiology 
Sedentary habits are highly prevalent around the world, and a WHO report indicates that physical 
inactivity is the fourth leading risk factor for deaths, following high blood pressure, tobacco use, and 
high blood glucose.  Low cardiorespiratory fitness, which is caused by physical inactivity, is a major 
predictor of incident type 2 diabetes.  This benefit occurs in normal weight, overweight, and obese 
individuals.   Moderate to high cardiorespiratory fitness, which can be developed by 150 minutes of 
moderate intensity physical activity per week, is associated with lower mortality rates in persons with 
type 2 diabetes.  This benefit is seen in all weight categories.  Obese individuals with diabetes who are 
at least moderately fit have much lower death rates during follow-up than do normal weight individuals 
who are unfit.   Regular physical activity is a key factor in preventing diabetes, and has major benefits 
for those who have diabetes.  
 

1.  Participants will be able to describe the extent of physical inactivity world-wide. 
2.  Participants will understand the role of physical inactivity and low cardiorespiratory fitness in the 

prevention of diabetes. 

3.  Participants will understand the value of maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness in individuals with 

Learning objectives: 

diabetes. 

 

 

15 
 

