 

Tim Church, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D. 
Tim Church is one of the country’s leading physicians in exercise and 
obesity research.  As Chief Medical Officer of ACAP Health Consulting, Dr. 
Church seeks to reduce the production of and destruction from disease by 
guiding the company in the creation of clinical strategies and disease 
specific battle plans.  He brings to ACAP Health, dynamic expertise in 
preventative health, nutrition and the power of physical activity. 
 
After receiving a Bachelor of Science in Animal Physiology from UC-Davis, 
Church received his Medical Doctorate and Ph.D. from Tulane University 
School of Medicine in new Orleans, LA.  During his preventive medicine 
residency training, he also obtained a master’s degree in Public Health. 
 

Church is a professor and director of the Preventive Medicine Research Laboratory at Pennington 
Biomedical Research Center at Louisiana State University where he promotes healthy living through 
research and education in nutrition and exercise biology.  As the former vice president of medical and 
laboratory research at The Cooper Institute in Dallas, he established himself as an international leader 
in some of the most comprehensive studies on human performance and disease prevention. 
 
Church has received numerous awards for his research in preventative health and is frequently used 
as an expert source for preventative health stories with major national media outlets.  As a consultant 
to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory 
Committee, Church contributed to their national report published in 2008.  He has also authored more 
than 150 research articles and co-authored, “Move Yourself, The Cooper Clinic Medical Director’s 
Guide to All Healing Benefits of Exercise (Even at Little!)”. 
 

1.  Among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, a combination of aerobic and resistance training 

compared with non-exercise control improves HbA1c levels. 

Learning objective: 

 

 

 

16 
 

