Thursday, June 11 

 
Michael Keenan, PhD 
Michael Keenan earned his PhD from the University of Illinois-Urbana in 
Nutritional Sciences in 1984.  He remained at University of Illinois for two 
years as a post-doc before moving to Louisiana State University in 1986.  
After ten years of investigation of the interaction between vitamin D and 
the ultratrace mineral boron, Michael Keenan changed to obesity 
research.  In 2001 Michael Keenan teamed up with Roy Martin who had 
recently moved to LSU from Georgia and began doing mechanistic, proof-
of-concept rodent studies with resistant starch.  This partnership has been 
very fruitful as far as publications and grant funding.  Initially their research 
focused on the mechanism of body fat reduction in rodents with diets with 
resistant starch using isocaloric control diets.  In recent years their focus 
has moved into the effects of resistant starch on the microbiota. 

 
"Review of Dietary Resistant Starch Mechanisms - Findings from Animal Models" 
Roy J Martin1, Christine Pelkman2, and Michael J. Keenan3 
1.Western USDA Research Center, 2. Ingredion Incorporated, 3. Louisiana State University AgCenter 
Animal models of diabetes and obesity of different etiologies have been used to demonstrate that 
dietary resistant starch has powerful effects on multiple mechanisms important in improving “metabolic 
health.”  For example, dietary resistant starch improves maternal glycemic control in Goto-Kakizaki rat, 
a model of diabetic pregnancy.  Resistant starch from high amylose maize (HAM-RS2) reduces body 
fat and increases gut bacteria in ovariectomized (OVX) rats, an animal model of menopausal weight 
gain.  A Caenorhabditis elegans model of obesity was used to demonstrate that aqueous extract of 
cecal contents of rats fed resistant starch reduced body lipid staining in worms.  Proposed 
mechanisms include the following: 1. enhanced gut microbial fermentation, 2. increased plasma levels 
of gut peptides, 3. elevated detoxification pathways,  4. improved bioavailabity of dietary polyphenols. 
The ability of dietary resistant starch to improve “metabolic health” consistently in different animal 
models provides strong support for positive outcomes in clinical studies.  Two obese models that did 
not respond to resistant starch with reduced body fat and improved insulin sensitivity were GLP-1 
receptor knockout mice and Zucker Diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats.  Thus, it appears that functional GLP-1 
and leptin receptors are necessary for beneficial health effects of resistant starch. Funding sources: 
Ingredion Incorporated and Louisiana State University AgCenter. 
 

Learning objectives: 

1. Several animal models of obesity and/or diabetes have fermented resistant starch and have had 

reduced body fat and improved glycemic control. 

2. Two animal models of obesity and diabetes have fermented resistant starch and have not 

responded with reduced body fat (Zucker Diabetic Fatty rats and GLP-1 receptor knockout mice) 
and improved glycemic control (Zucker Diabetic Fatty rats). 

3. Rodent studies demonstrate that functional GLP-1 and leptin receptors are necessary for 

responding to fermentation of resistant starch.   

4. Human studies demonstrate that production of GLP-1 is not required for improved glycemic control 
when fed resistant starch, thus, other mechanisms exist for the benefits of consumption of resistant 
starch. 

 

 

18 
 

