 

W.H.M. Saris, MD, PhD. 
Wim H.M. Saris MD, PhD, Professor of Human Nutrition at the Faculty of 
Health, Medicine and Life Science of the Maastricht University, The 
Netherlands. In 1992 he initiated the Nutrition and Toxicology Research 
Institute NUTRIM and was the scientific director till 2005. From 2005 till 
2014 he was part-time Corporate Scientist Human Nutrition at DSM, 
Nutritional Ingredients division.  
 
He is author or co-author of 7 books and over 450 scientifically refereed 
articles dealing with topics like nutrition, obesity, type 2 diabetes, exercise 
physiology, cancer cachexia, functional foods and nutrigenomics. He 
coordinated a number of EU funded projects among others CARMEN and 
DIOGENES and served many national and international committees 

among others the Dutch Health and Nutrition Council and the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF now 
EFSA) of the European Commission in Brussels and the European Technology Platform (ETP) 
initiative “Food for Life” and chairmen of the EU Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) “ Healthy diet for a 
healthy life”. 
 
Glycemic response/index/load for weight management 
Weight gain and in particular weight regain is a common physiological response to increase 
consumption of palatable food and/or a reduction in physical activity. All macronutrients contribute to 
the risk of overfeeding. In particular En% fat is a powerful driver for passive overfeeding. For 
carbohydrate and in particular on the effects of high vs. low Glycemic Index, the number of RCT’s is 
limited. Prospective studies showed a positive relation of 0.42 kg body weight per 50 units of Glycemic 
load over a 4-year period.  However we should consider this type of data with great caution since food 
intake data nowadays is very much biased. 
 
The only available Cochrane analysis (Elliott and Bauer 2007) with 4 RCT’s showed a 1.1 kg weight 
loss in the low GI diet vs. high GI or other diet. The recent Diogenes trial showed a positive weight 
maintenance effect with a low GI/high protein diet over 6 months. In contrast to the protein effect after 
one year the GI effect disappeared.  

1.  Fat compare to Carbohydrates has a greater impact on long-term body weight control. 
2.  Food intake data are more and more an unreliable source of actual intake of macronutrients. 
3.  Low glycemic vs. high glycemic foods has a moderate positive effect on long-term body weight 

 

Learning objectives: 

control 

 

 

 

20 
 

