 

Thomas MS Wolever, MD, PhD, DM 
Thomas Wolever obtained a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of 
Surgery from Oxford University, UK in 1980, a PhD in Nutritional 
Sciences from the University of Toronto in 1986 and a Doctorate in 
Medicine from Oxford University in 1993.  His current position is 
Professor and Graduate Coordinator in the Department of Nutritional 
Sciences, University of Toronto.  He has the following cross 
appointments: Professor, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto; 
Scientist, Keenan Research Centre of the Li Ka Shing Knowledge 
Institute, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto; Member, Active Medical Staff, 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St. Michael’s Hospital, 
Toronto; and Member, Consulting Medical Staff, Centre for Addiction 
and Mental Health, University of Toronto.   

 
Thomas Wolever’s research interests are the effects of dietary carbohydrates on human physiology 
and metabolism.  He is, perhaps, most well-known for work on the glycaemic index which was as first 
developed by Dr. David Jenkins and Dr. Wolever, along with other collaborators, while he was a 
medical student.  He has written or co-authored over 300 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals, 
and also authored a book entitled: The Glycaemic Index: A Physiological Classification of Dietary 
Carbohydrate published in 2006 by CABI (www.cabi.org).  In 1997 he founded GI Testing, Inc. to 
provide confidential GI testing services to industry.  To cope with the high demand for GI testing and to 
enable a wider range of clinical research services to be provided, Glycemic Index Laboratories, Inc. 
(www.gilabs.com) was formed in 2004; a corporation of which Dr. Wolever is President.  More 
important than anything else, Dr. Wolever is married with 3 children aged 26, 24 and 17 years.  He 
enjoys orienteering, cycling and recorder playing. 
 
Glycemic response/index/load: Methodological issues 
Controlling post-prandial blood glucose is recognized as being beneficial for health.  However, since 
glycemic responses can be quantified in numerous ways, it is important for scientific and regulatory 
purposes to understand the meaning and analytical performance of different methods.  I will review the 
definitions of glycemic response (GR), glycemic index (GI) and glycemic load (GL) and the methods 
used to determine them.  When comparing the GR of foods, the results obtained, and their precision, 
depends both quantitatively and qualitatively on the methods used.  The 2010 ISO method for 
measuring the GI of foods includes several new features compared to the original (1981) method.  The 
between-laboratory CV of the original GI method is 30% more precise than comparing GR; recent data 
suggest the ISO method is 25-30% more precise than the original method.  The 2010 ISO method for 
GI is recommended as a marker of carbohydrate quality precise enough for regulatory purposes. 

1.   Be able to define the meaning of GI. 
2.   Be able to state the difference between GR, GI and GL. 
3.   Be able to list 2 of the new features of the 2010 ISO method for determining the GI of foods 
 

Learning objectives: 

 

 

22 
 

