 

Alan Barclay, APD, PhD, AN 
Alan is an Accredited Practicing Dietitian and Nutritionist and completed a 
PhD at the University of Sydney in the mid 2000’s on the association 
between glycemic carbohydrate and the risk of developing lifestyle-related 
diseases. Alan is currently the Chief Scientific Officer at Glycemic Index 
Foundation (part-time). Alan worked for Diabetes Australia in both a full 
and part-time capacity, from 1998 - 2014, as Head of research. Alan has 
worked in clinical dietetics and has maintained a private practice in 
Sydney since 1995. Alan is an official Media Spokesperson for the 
Dietitians Association of Australia and has appeared frequently in 
newspapers, magazines, radio and television news.  Alan has published 
~30 peer reviewed articles in the scientific literature and is a co-author of 
the New Glucose Revolution: Diabetes & Pre-diabetes handbook, Low GI 
Diet Managing Type 2 Diabetes and The Ultimate Guide to Sugars and 

Sweeteners. 
 
Glycemic index labeling: The Australian Experience 
Dr. Alan W. Barclay (PhD), Glycemic Index Foundation, Sydney, Australia. 
Healthy low GI foods can be incorporated into diabetes prevention/management plans.  
The GI Symbol is a front-of-pack labelling scheme that requires foods to be low GI, and meet nutrient 
criteria for kilojoules, carbohydrate, saturated fat, sodium, fibre and calcium.  
 
Market research was conducted in 2002 - 2007, and 2012. Participants were 490-1,502 main grocery 
buyers representative of the Australian adult population. In 2002, 5 foods carried the Symbol and this 
increased to over 150 by 2012. In 2002, 28% of respondents were aware of the GI. This increased to 
86% by 2005, and has remained the same from that point in time onwards. Awareness of the Symbol 
was 2% at baseline, and increased to 37% by 2012. Most (94%) consumers who were aware of the GI 
looked for the Symbol when shopping.  
 
In conclusion, the GI Symbol is a simple front-of-pack labelling tool that helps people identify healthy 
low GI foods when shopping.  
 

Learning objectives: 

1. Participants will understand that the GI Symbol is a front-of pack labelling scheme that certifies that 
a food has had its GI tested according to ISO 26642:2010 and also meets stringent nutrient criteria 
for kilojoules, carbohydrate, saturated fat, sodium, and in certain foods fibre and calcium in line with 
international dietary guidelines. 

2. Understand that through appropriate public relations activities, the general public can understand 

that low GI foods are healthier options than high GI equivalents. 

3. Recognise that Australian consumers are not unique and that lessons learned in Australia can be 

translated in to other territories implementing similar programs  

 

 

  

23 
 

