 

Alfred Aziz, PhD 
Alfred Aziz is the Chief, Nutrition Regulations and Standards Division, 
Bureau of Nutritional Sciences, Food Directorate, Health Canada. 
 
Dr. Aziz holds a bachelor and master degree in Nutrition from the 
American University of Beirut, Lebanon, and PhD in Nutritional Sciences 
from the University of Toronto. In 2005, he received the Health Canada’s 
Office of the Chief Scientist postdoctoral fellowship award and two years 
later, was appointed as a research scientist in Health Canada’s Bureau of 
Nutritional Sciences. His graduate, post-graduate and independent 
research programs included food intake regulation, as well as lipid and 
carbohydrate metabolism. Concurrently, Dr. Aziz became involved in 
several policy files, such as health claims and the development of a 
framework to curb childhood obesity. Between 2012 and 2015, he was a participant of the Health 
Canada Science Management Development Program, and occupied several leadership positions and 
worked on different files, including paediatric initiatives; medical marihuana regulations; risk 
assessment and risk management; and recently, nutrition labelling and other food and nutrition 
regulatory modernization initiatives.   
 
Regulation of glycemic response/index/load claims: Health Canada’s perspective 
The purpose of this presentation is to provide an overview of the food health claims framework in 
Canada and Health Canada’s perspective on function claims related to the management of 
postprandial glycemia and glycemic index (GI) claims. The Food and drugs Acts prohibits the use of 
food health claims that are false or misleading. Under this overarching principle, Health Canada uses 
a risk-based approach to enable health claims through either regulations or policy.  With respect to the 
management of postprandial glycemia, Health Canada consulted on a draft guidance document for the 
substantiation of function claims related to the reduction of the glycemic response and is currently in 
the process of completing the review and analysis of the comments received. While some challenges 
had been identified regarding GI claims, Health Canada is providing support and advice to a Canadian 
Diabetes Association initiative in exploring options for a GI symbol on foods.   
 

1.  Provide an overview of the food health claims framework in Canada 
2.  Provide an overview of Health Canada’s perspectives on claims related to the management of 

Learning objectives: 

postprandial glycemia: 
a) function claims for the reduction of the glycemic response  to foods 
b) potential path forward for GI claims 
 

 

 

 

25 
 

