 

Berna Magnuson, PhD 
Berna Magnuson, Ph.D, ATS is an internationally recognized food 
toxicologist and a Fellow of the Academy of Toxicological Sciences. She 
holds degrees in food and nutritional sciences and worked in the food 
industry in quality assurance and product development before 
undertaking graduate training in food toxicology at Universities of 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Berna worked as a professor for 15 years, 
at the University of Idaho and University of Maryland, conducting 
research and teaching food, nutrition and toxicology courses, before 
returning to Canada. She is currently managing her own consultancy 
practice and teaches food regulatory courses at the University of Toronto. 
As a consultant, she provides expertise in food regulations, nutrition and 
toxicology to food, beverage, and dietary supplement manufacturers and 

ingredient industries, as well as health professional and consumer associations.  
 
Dr. Magnuson has extensive experience and expertise in low calorie sweetener safety, and serves as 
an expert advisor and speaker on this topic around the world. She has published numerous peer-
reviewed articles, book chapters, and professional articles, is on the editorial board of two journals, 
and is an active member of various professional associations. 
 
Safety and metabolic effects of low-calorie sweeteners 
There is a great deal of misinformation concerning the safety of use of low calorie sweeteners, in the 
public and among health professionals. As diabetes and obesity continue to be prominent, it is critical 
that individuals feel confident in the safety of use of these sweeteners that may be beneficial for 
weight loss and blood sugar control. 
 
The goal of this presentation is to provide an understanding of safety of approved low calorie 
sweeteners for all members of the population and to provide participants with a better understanding 
of the source of controversies surrounding low calorie sweeteners. A brief review of the metabolic 
effects of the different sweeteners will be presented. This will allow participants to be better prepared 
to assess appropriateness and limitations of study design and conclusions, and to address patient and 
client concerns.  
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  Describe the regulatory process for ensuring the safety of low calorie sweeteners approved for use 

in foods and beverages 

2.  Understand the differences in the various low calories sweeteners, including differences in 

metabolism.  

3.  Recognize the common sources of controversies of safety of low calorie sweeteners.  
 

 

 

26 
 

