 

Fred Brouns, PhD 
 Prof Dr. Fred Brouns obtained his PhD at Maastricht University, 
Netherlands, entitled “Food and Fluid Related Aspects in Highly Trained 
athletes”, For work this he was awarded the Dutch Sports Medicine 
Award. Fred headed international Nutrition and Health R&D functions at 
Wander Dietetics, Sandoz Nutrition, Novartis Nutrition, Eridania Beghin 
Say, Cerestar and Cargill Inc. At the International Life Sciences Institute 
(ILSI) Europe he chaired the Carbohydrates Committee and in various 
expert panels (glycemic index, postprandial glycemia, satiety regulation). 
Fred became invited member of the British Nutrition Society and is a 
registered Biomedical Researcher as well as board member (2008-2012) 
of the Dutch Academy of Nutritional Sciences. Since 2008 he holds a 
chair in Health Food Innovation at the Faculty of Health, Medicine and 

Life and Sciences within the research school NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research 
in Metabolism of Maastricht University. Fred has > 200 publications, citations according to WoS: 
sum 5372, average 30.18 /item ; H-index:43 
 
Fruit juice- impact on nutrient quality, obesity and diabetes 
Prof Dr Fred Brouns, Chair "Health Food Innovation", Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, 
NUTRIM, Maastricht University, Netherlands 
 
Fruit and vegetable juices provide a wide range of nutrients that fit well in a healthy diet. However, 
juices also contain relatively high amounts of natural fruit sugars. In recent years, consumers and 
media alike have therefore questioned the health aspects of juices when consumed in large quantities. 
It has been suggested that in general juices, like sugar-sweetened soft drinks, contribute to obesity 
and diabetes through the supply of undesirable high levels of sugar. However, at present, available 
scientific evidence shows that consumption of 100% fruit juice is associated with a healthier life style 
and no impact on diabetes in children and adults. In contrast fruit drinks containing also added sugars 
may be associated with increased disease risks. Similar to other food and drink products, juices 
should be consumed in moderation to ensure appropriate variety and balance in the diet. 
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  100% Juice differs significantly from Sugar Sweetened Beverages (SSB's) 
2.  In contrast to SSB's 100% juice consumption is NOT related to increased diabetes risks 
3.  100% juice contains bioactive fruit components with beneficial effects on diabetes risk factors 
4.  Fruit sugars as present in fruit or in beverage are equally metabolized 
5.  The GI of apple and orange does not differ from the GI of their juice. 
6.  100 % juice should be consumed in small quantities (equivalent to 1-2 fruits) 
 

 

 

28 
 

