 

Jennie Brand-Miller, PhD 
Prof. Brand-Miller has a BSc (Food Science and Technology), PhD, 
AM, Fellow of Nutrition Society of Australia, Fellow of Australian 
Institute of Food Science and Technology, Personal Chair in Human 
Nutrition in the School of Molecular Bioscience and Charles Perkins 
Centre at the University of Sydney.   
 
Brand-Miller is an academic and researcher with 30 years’ experience 
in a variety of research techniques including dietary intervention studies 
in pregnancy and animal models, observational cohorts, randomised 
controlled trials, systematic reviews and meta-analysis. Her research 
has focused on all aspects of carbohydrates—diet and diabetes, diet 

and pregnancy, insulin resistance, lactose intolerance and oligosaccharides in infant nutrition, with 
more than 250 scientific publications. She currently leads the Australian arm of the world’s largest 
diabetes prevention study (the PREVIEW study) with responsibility for its dissemination and 
exploitation.  She plays a major role health promotion in Australia as President of the Glycemic Index 
Symbol Program (www.gisymbol.com). Her popular books have translated research to practice and 
made the GI a household word, with over 3.5 million copies sold worldwide in 12 languages.  She 
Chairs the University of Sydney’s Disability Action Plan Committee, the Shepherd Centre’s Research 
Advisory Committee, and is a past-President of the Nutrition Society of Australia and immediate-past 
Chair of the National Committee for Nutrition of the Australian Academy of Science.   
 
GI as a marker of carbohydrate quality 
Changes in the quality and quantity of carbohydrate foods may compromise nutrient intake. We 
hypothesized that glycemic index (GI), glycemic load (GL), carbohydrate intake, grains and cereal 
products would be associated with nutrient adequacy in pregnancy. Healthy women (n = 566), and 
women with gestational diabetes (n = 82) completed three-day food records in the third trimester. 
Nutrient intakes were compared to the national recommendations, and energy-adjusted tertiles of GI, 
GL, were correlated against nutrient intake. After adjustment for age, ethnicity, pre-pregnancy BMI, 
and intervention group, energy intake in healthy women was positively related to intake of all 
micronutrients. GI, GL and  starch intake were inversely related to micronutrient intake, while higher 
total sugars predicted improved intake. The majority of women with GDM did not meet 
recommendations for fiber, folate, sodium, vitamin D, iodine and iron, and exceeded guidelines for 
saturated fat and sodium. High dietary glycemic load and grain intake predict greater risk of poor 
nutrition in pregnancy. 
 

1. To understand relationship between average GI and glycemic load of whole diets and intake of 

Learning objectives: 

micronutrients 

2. To understand relationship between total sugars & starch content and intake of micronutrients 
 

 

 

30 
 

