Invited Speakers 

 
Wednesday, June 10 

 
Jordi Salas-Salvadó, MD, PhD 
Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, Sant Joan 
University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine of Reus, Rovira i Virgili University, Spain; Pere 
Virgili Institute of Health Research; CIBER Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition, 
Institute of Health Carlos III, Spain. Dr Salas Salvadó is Professor of Human 
Nutrition and Bromatology at the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences (Rovira i 
Virgili University).  He is Head of Nutrition of the Internal Medicine Service, Sant Joan 
University Hospital of Reus and Vice-Dean / Head of Studies of the Degree in Human 
Nutrition and Dietetics of the Rovira i Virgili University.  He is also Distinguished 
Professor at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili.  In recent years, the expertise and research 

lines of Dr Salas are focused on human clinical trials evaluating the effect of diets and dietary compounds on 
obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease. Since 2005, he has been one 
of the leaders of PREDIMED STUDY, considered the best clinical trial evaluating the effect of the Mediterranean 
Diet on cardiovascular diseases. He is the coordinator and a member of the Steering Committee of the 
PREDIMED-PLUS STUDY, a multi-centre, randomised, primary prevention trial on 6000 overweight or obese 
participants (55-75 years) with metabolic syndrome. The project aim is to determine the effect on adiposity, 
cardiovascular disease and mortality and quality of life, of an intensive weight loss intervention based on a 
traditional hypocaloric Mediterranean Diet, physical activity promotion and behavioural therapy compared to a 
less intensive program using Mediterranean diet (without energy restriction or physical activity). The recruitment 
started in September 2013 and will finish in June 2016. Final results will be available in 2020.  Since 1983 Dr. 
Salas has directed 18 research projects financed by public bodies and 23 projects in conjunction with the 
pharmaceutical or food industries. He has published more than 290 original articles in national and international 
journals, as well as numerous reviews and editorials. Editor of 6 books, he has also co-authored more than 50 
books. 
 
The Mediterranean diet in diabetes 
Jordi Salas Salvadóa for the PREDIMED – Plus study investigators 
aHuman Nutrition Unit, Hospital Universitari de Sant Joan de Reus, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, IISPV (Institut 
d’Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili), Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain, 
and b CIBERobn (Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición), Institute of Health 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. 
 
There are no large randomized clinical trials in overweight subjects evaluating the effect of a long-term sustained 
intentional weight loss using a healthy diet and physical activity promotion on the risk of cardiovascular clinical 
events.  The PREDIMED Plus study is a randomized, multicenter, parallel-group trial for the primary prevention 
of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Six thousand men and woman without prior CVD, aged between 55 – 75 
years, with metabolic syndrome and body mass index between 27- 40 kg/m2 (<25% of them with diabetes) will 
be recruited by primary care medical doctors affiliated to 22 centers throughout Spain to evaluate the effect of an 
intensive energy-restricted Mediterranean diet, physical activity promotion and behavioral treatment, versus a 
control group receiving low-intensity recommendations to follow a Mediterranean diet. The mail outcomes are: 
incidence of CVD, weight loss and maintenance, quality of life, incidence of other chronic diseases related to 
obesity, changes in CVD risk factors, and use of medication. The results of this novel clinical trial will contribute 
to provide a strong evidence to develop guidelines for overweight management aimed to the primary prevention 
of CVD. 
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  Cross-sectional and prospective studies showed negative associations between some traditional 

Mediterranean foods or adherence to the Mediterranean diet and diabetes incidence. 

2.  The PREDIMED trial provided strong evidence that a vegetable-based MeDiet rich in unsaturated fat and 

polyphenols can be a sustainable and ideal model for diabetes prevention. 

3.  Randomized trials showed beneficial effects of the Mediterranean diet compared to other dietary patterns on 

glycemic control in patients with diabetes. 

 

4 
 

