 

Jim Mann,CNZM, PhD, DM, FRACP, FFPHM, FRSNZ 
Professor in Human Nutrition and Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin,  
New Zealand .  Jim Mann has been Professor in Human Nutrition and 
Medicine at the University of Otago and Consultant Physician 
(Endocrinology) in Dunedin Hospital for the past 28 years. Previously he 
was a University lecturer at Oxford and a Physician in the Radcliffe 
Infirmary and John Radcliffe Hospital.   He is Director of the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Human Nutrition, the Edgar 
Diabetes and Obesity Research Centre at the University of Otago and 
principal investigator for the Riddet Institute, a national Centre of Research 
Excellence at Massey University.  His research has been in the fields of 
lipids and carbohydrates as they relate to diabetes, coronary heart disease 

and obesity. He has been involved with national and international government and nongovernmental 
organisations in guideline development relating to diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer and 
nutrition.   He has been author and coauthor of over 300 publications in peer-reviewed journals, 
written and edited textbooks and popular books.  In 2004 he received the Sir Charles Hercus Medal of 
the Royal Society of New Zealand.  He was appointed a Companion of the New Zealand Order of 
Merit for services to Medicine in 2003 and in 2012 the first recipient of the Himsworth Award given by 
the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD/DNSG) for his contribution to nutrition 
research in diabetes. 
 
Andrew Reynolds 
Andrew is a PhD candidate undertaking research on glycaemic regulation in T2 
diabetes under the guidance of Professor Jim Mann at the University of Otago. 
The structural integrity of dietary fiber and resultant physiological effects form part 
of his research.  Andrew views a future role in informing evidence-based policy 
for non-communicable disease prevention and management 
 
 
 
 

Dietary Fibre as a marker of carbohydrate quality 
Dietary fibre has been defined by Codex Alimentarius to include both synthetic and extracted 
carbohydrate polymers as well as polymers naturally occurring in food, with 10 or more monomeric 
units which are not hydrolysed by endogenous enzymes in the small intestine of humans. Synthetic 
and extracted fibres must have a physiological effect and benefit to health that has been accepted by 
competent authorities. A substantial body of epidemiological evidence demonstrates the benefits of 
fibres naturally occurring in food in terms of several hard clinical endpoints without any untoward 
effects. These findings combined with the potential of such fibres to favorably influence 
gastrointestinal function and a wide range of cardiometabolic measurements have led to the 
widespread acceptance of dietary fibre naturally occurring in food as an acceptable marker of quality 
in carbohydrate rich foods. While synthetic and extracted fibres may well have health promoting 
physiological effects, they are typically added to manufactured foods which may be inappropriately 
energy dense and or nutrient poor in terms of essential micronutrients. Furthermore, there is currently 
insufficient evidence that synthetic and extracted fibres are free of long-term side effects. Therefore 
we conclude that total dietary fibre as currently defined is not necessarily a marker of carbohydrate 
quality. 
 

1.  Understand the complexity of defining dietary fibre. 
2.  Evidence available for linking different dietary fibres with health outcomes. 
3.  The relevance of the vehicle of delivery for synthetic and extracted fibres. 

Learning objectives: 

 

31 
 

