 

Furio Brighenti, DrPH 
Furio Brighenti, 58, is Full Professor and Chair of Human Nutrition at the 
Department of Food Science and currently serves as Vice-Rector for 
Research of the University of Parma, Italy. He’s got a MSc in Food Sciences 
and a DrPH in Public Health Nutrition at the university of Milan.  
 
Prof. Brighenti was Dean of the University Degree in Gastronomic Sciences of 
the University of Parma (2009-2012); Vice-president of the Italian Nutrition 
Society (2000-2003) and, since 2009, the current President of the same 
society; Member of the Expert Commission “Food and School” of the Italian 
Ministry of Education and Research (2009-2011); Head of the Area of Human 
Nutrition at the Department of Public Health, University of Parma (2004- 

2012) and current Head of the Human and Public Health Nutrition Area of the Department of Food 
Science; Advisor of the Antidiabetic Food Centre of the University of Lund (SWE) (2010-to date); 
Associate editor of the journal Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease (2009-2012); Editor-
in-Chief of the International Journal of Food Sciences & Nutrition (2012-to date); scientific Co-ordinator 
of the expert panel for the revision of the Italian DRVs (2010-to date); Member of the Scientific 
advisory board of the project Giocampus (2008-to date).  
 
Prof. Brighenti’s research work is mainly focused on the metabolic and physiological effects of foods 
and food components. On these topics he published more than 130 research papers on indexed 
international journals (see publication details and metrics on Research ID at  
http://www.researcherid.com/rid/E-4174-2010). Based on citation metrics, he’s been included in the 
2014 Thomson Reuters list of the Highly Cited Researchers in the field of Agricultural Sciences ( 
http://highlycited.com ) . 
 
In vitro digestibility of carbohydrates as a marker of carbohydrate quality 
Background and purpose:  Postprandial glucose response is influenced not only by the efficiency in 
glucose disposal but also by the rate of glucose absorption, an effect strongly influenced by food 
nature and composition.  Aim of this talk will be to briefly review the aspects of carbohydrate foods 
related to starch digestibility and glucose absorption.  Methods:  A review was made on the scientific 
literature reporting data on starch digestibility and postprandial glycaemia. Factors such as gastric 
emptying, accessibility to a-amylase, presence of dietary fibre and amylase inhibitors, food structure 
as affected by processing, cooking, and chewing, were investigated. Published methods aimed to 
assess the overall carbohydrate digestibility or specifically related aspects were also reviewed, 
including the EFSA opinions on Resistant and Slowly-Digestible Starch in Starch-containing foods. 
Food studies that used emerging techniques such as Scanning Electron Microscopy and Differential 
Scanning Calorimetry were also explored to identify possible mechanisms of action.   Conclusions 
and implications:  In-vitro starch digestibility and other laboratory techniques may represent useful 
for exploring mechanisms of action of low-glycaemic index foods, in pre-screening foods to be further 
submitted to in-vivo testing and in designing novel foods specially aimed to control the postprandial 
glucose response. However, they do not completely describe the complex nature of the interaction of 
foods/diets with the human digestive physiology and metabolism of nutrients.   
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  Postprandial glucose response may be affected by food quality 
2.  In-vitro Starch digestibility may represent a marker of food quality 
3.  Industrial and domestic food processing can be used to manipulate starch digestibility, and thus the 

effect of carbohydrate foods on postprandial glycaemia. 

4.  Dietary advice on carbohydrate-foods selection may benefit from information on carbohydrate 

quality data assessed by both in-vitro and in-vivo methods    

  

33 
 

