 

Jared Carlberg, Ph.D  
Jared Carlberg, Ph.D., is Associate Professor of Agribusiness & 
Agricultural Economics and Associate Dean (Academic) in the Faculty of 
Agricultural and Food Sciences at the University of Manitoba. His 
research focuses on the economic costs of food-related chronic 
diseases, consumer preferences for food products, and the relationships 
between food intake decisions and self-perceptions of the impacts of 
food choice on future health states.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Health Economic Impact of Increased Dietary Fibre Intake – A Canadian Example 
 
Jared Carlberg1, Ph.D; Peter JH Jones2, PhD; and Mohammad Abdullah3 
1. Associate Professor & Associate Dean (Academic), Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences, 
University of Manitoba 
2. Director, Richardson Centre for Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals, Canada Research Chair (Tier 
I) in Nutrition and Functional Foods, and Professor, Departments of Food Sciences and Human 
Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba 
3. Ph.D. Candidate, Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba 
 
The interplay between nutrition and lifestyle-related health outcomes has been well-established. More 
recently, focus has been shifting to the economic costs of nutrition-related disease, with the impact of 
food choices on health-related costs gaining considerable attention. Not only could tens of thousands 
of deaths be averted or delayed each year, but also substantial economic savings could be realized if 
a greater proportion of the population complied with dietary recommendations. Adopting health-
conscious nutritional habits that are known to reduce disease risk could thus reduce the economic 
strain associated with treating nutrition-related chronic disorders. Our research has focused on the 
economic valuations of functional foods and certain dietary entities, as well as those of overall 
dietary improvements.Through a series of economic framework designs encompassing variations of 
cost-of-illness analyses, we have provided evidence of non-trivial savings in costs associated with 
public health concerns following greater adherence to dietary guidelines and policies. 
 

1. Understanding the steps within a cost-of-illness approach 
2. Interpreting the various types of direct and indirect costs and associating them with specific 

Learning objectives: 

diseases 

3. Translating disease reductions into healthcare costs savings 
 
 

 

 

38 
 

