 

Hertzel C. Gerstein MD MSc FRCPC 
Dr. Hertzel C. Gerstein is an Endocrinologist and Professor at McMaster 
University and Hamilton Health Sciences, where he holds the Population 
Health Institute Chair in Diabetes Research. He is also Director of the 
Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Director of the Diabetes Care and 
Research Program and Deputy Director of the Population Health Research 
Institute. He has received several honors including the Canadian Diabetes 
Association’s Young Scientist Award (1999), Frederick G. Banting award 
(1999), Charles H. Best award (2007) and Lifetime Achievement Award 
(2012).  Dr. Gerstein has led the application of large simple outcome trials 
to people with diabetes globally, and developed the concept of dysglycemia 
as an important risk factor for many of the serious health outcomes that 

afflict people with an elevated glucose level regardless of diabetes status. His research spans over 50 
countries, and has been funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the National Institutes 
of Health, the Heart and Stroke Foundation, the Canadian Diabetes Association and Industry.  Dr. 
Gerstein has published more than 300 papers, editorials and commentaries, mainly on diabetes-
related issues.  
 
Why do we need large pragmatic outcomes RCT’s of nutritional interventions? 
Changes in nutrition throughout history have had remarkable effects on clinically important outcomes. 
Such clinically important outcomes include death, strokes, disability, cognitive decline and other things 
that are important to both patients as well as healthcare providers. Nutritional interventions that can be 
proven to have clinically important effects on these health outcomes are likely to be rapidly adopted by 
people. Conversely interventions that simply affect biochemical or clinical parameters such as serum 
analytes or blood pressure or glucose level will be subject to controversy. Large clinical outcomes 
trials that are focused on outcomes that are important to society, patients and providers are clearly the 
best way to demonstrate the value of new nutritional interventions in the general population and in 
subgroups such as those with diabetes. Such trials can do this convincingly and effectively because of 
the very powerful tool of randomization. Epidemiological approaches that analyze databases or even 
prospectively recruit and follow participants are unable to clearly establish the effect of any 
intervention. At best they can identify risk factors and stratify people into lower versus higher risk 
groups. They may also suggest hypotheses regarding the effects of interventions however they are 
unable to determine whether: (a) any particular therapy is effective at reducing outcomes; (b) any 
benefits of such therapies outweigh the risks; and (c) whether the measured effect is due to the 
therapy or to patient characteristics associated with the propensity to get the therapy and the outcome. 
Conversely the randomized controlled trial is able to make this determination because randomization 
ensures that: (a) both measured and unmeasured confounders are randomly distributed within the 2 
groups; and (if the groups are large enough) the groups are equal on average except for the therapy 
provider that will not provide it. Once the trial is finished researchers can assume with great 
confidence that any difference in outcomes between the 2 groups is due to the therapy that was 
assessed. Such clinical trials are arduous and costly however they are indispensable and have 
definitively and unequivocally proven the benefits of a wide variety of therapies throughout medicine. 
This evidence is used by governments and other third party payers to justify adoption of these 
therapies and have dramatically reduced outcomes in various populations. 
 

1.  Clarify what is meant when discussing clinical outcomes and outcomes trials 
2.  Identify the methodologic weaknesses inherent in all non-randomized comparisons and highlight 

Learning objectives: 

the strengths of randomization 

3.  Illustrate the limitations of “big data” using examples from the diabetes literature 
 
 

39 
 

