Edward S. Horton, MD 
Edward Horton is Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School and 
Senior Investigator at the Joslin Diabetes Center. He received his medical 
degree from Harvard Medical School in 1957. Following internship in 
surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital and military service in Germany, he 
received residency/fellowship  training in pathology at Dartmouth Medical 
School and in medicine and endocrineology at Duke University Medical 
Center. In 1967, he went to the University of Vermont College of Medicine, 
where he worked for 26 years as Director of Endocrinology and Metabolism 
and then as Chairman of the Department of Medicine. In 1993, he was 
appointed Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School and Medical 
Director of the Joslin Diabetes Center. Currently he is a Senior Investigator 
at the Joslin Diabetes Center. He has over 450 publications and is the 

recipient of several awards, including the ADA Banting Medal for Distinguished Service, the ASCN 
Robert H. Herman Award, the Mizuno Award and Lectureship, the IDF John A. Galloway Award, the 
ADA Outstanding Physician Educator Award, the Endocrine Society Distinguished Physician Award, 
the ADA Albert Renold Award and the JK Lilly Award. He is past president of the American Diabetes 
Association and the American Society for Clinical Nutrition and served as Chairman of the National 
Diabetes Advisory Board. 
 
Lessons Learned from the LookAHEAD Trial 
Type 2 diabetes and obesity are increasing rapidly throughout the world. Approaches to the prevention 
and treatment of this dual epidemic have focused on the use of medications and programs of lifestyle 
modification (ILS) that include a healthy diet, weight loss and increased physical activity to improve 
glucose control and other CVD risk factors to reduce the development of long-term complications of 
diabetes. 
 
The LookAHEAD Trial is comparing the effects of an ILS program with standard care (CON) on CVD 
events and other complications of diabetes in approximately 5000 overweight subjects with 
established type 2 diabetes. After one year of treatment, subjects lost and average of 8% of initial 
body weight and significantly increased their level of physical fitness compared to the CON group. 
They also achieved better glucose control, lower blood pressure and improved lipids. Despite some 
regain in weight, these benefits have been sustained over a period of at least 10 years. However, both 
the control and ILS groups have had relatively low rates of CVD events, with no significant differences 
between the two groups, although there was greater use of antihypertensive and lipid lowering 
medications in the CON group than in the ILS group. The ILS group also had marked improvements in 
obstructive sleep apnea, greater mobility and fewer co-morbidities compared to CON. 
 
This study demonstrates that a program of ILS modification can be sustained for a significant period of 
time and has long term benefits in reducing several CVD risk factors and improving other co-
morbidities.. However, in this study the long-term effects of an ILS program to decrease CVD events 
has not been demonstrated. 
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  To understand the rationale, design and principal results of the LookAHEAD Trial 
2.  To evaluate the effects of an intensive lifestyle modification program on glycemic control in people 

with established type 2 diabetes mellitus. 

3.  To evaluate the effects of an intensive lifestyle modification program on cardio-vascular disease 

risk factors and cardiovascular outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes. 

4.  To evaluate the effects of an intensive lifestyle modification program on other obesity-related 

conditions in people with type 2 diabetes. 

 

40 
 

