Ulf Risérus, PhD 
After postdoctoral training at Oxford Centre of Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Oxford University, Risérus´ was in 2009 appointed associate 
professor in clinical nutrition and metabolism at the Medical Faculty, 
Uppsala University, Sweden. He is leading a research group targeting 
dietary prevention of obesity and its related diseases. Specific expertise 
concerns the role of dietary fats and Nordic dietary patterns in 
cardiometabolic diseases. Risérus is since 2012 the president of the 
Diabetes and Nutrition Study Group of the European Association for the 
Study of Diabetes (EASD), a pan European study group that develops 
evidence-based nutritional guidelines for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.  
 
The Nordic diet in diabetes 

Dr Ulf Risérus, Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, 
Uppsala University, Sweden 
 
A Healthy Nordic diet consists of a combination of healthy foods occurring in recommended dietary 
patterns (e.g. Mediterranean diet and DASH-diet), and is mainly a plant-based fibre-rich diet that also 
includes fish. The Healthy Nordic diet is low in saturated fat, trans fat and red meats with the majority 
of fat coming from rapeseed oil, sunflower oil, seeds and nuts (e.g. hazelnuts, almonds) and fatty fish. 
Carbohydrate sources include wholegrain rye, barley and oats, but less from wheat. Fruits (e.g. apples 
and pears) and berries, as well as legumes, vegetables, root vegetables and cabbages are also key 
foods. Although no data exist in patients with diabetes, limited available data suggest promising 
results with regard to prevention of prediabetes, cardiometabolic disorders and reduction of mortality 
risk. Ongoing and future studies are needed to gain knowledge regarding the role of healthy Nordic 
foods in type 2 diabetes. 
 

1.  To know what a Healthy Nordic diet is 
2.  What is the scientific data on the effects on such diet on prediabetic states (e.g. metabolic 

Learning objectives: 

syndrome and hyperlipidemia) and on diabetes and CVD risk factors 

3.  What is the association with CVD and mortality in observational studies 
4.  What are the key knowledge gaps in this field 
 
 

 

 

 
 

5 
 

