David JA Jenkins, MD, D.Sc, Ph.D 
Educated at Oxford University, Dr. Jenkins is currently a professor in both 
the Departments of Nutritional Sciences and Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, a staff physician in the Division of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Director of the Clinical Nutrition and 
Risk Factor Modification Center, and a Scientist in the Li Ka Shing 
Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's Hospital. He has served on 
committees in Canada and the United States that have formulated 
nutritional guidelines for the treatment of diabetes and recommendations 
for fibre and macronutrient intake (fat protein and carbohydrates) for the 
general population (the recommended daily intakes e.g. that you see on 
food labels) under the joint United States-Canada DRI system (RDAs) of 
the National Academy of Sciences (Washington, DC).  He and his 
colleagues developed the cholesterol lowering  dietary portfolio, that  was 

the only dietary approach referenced in 2004 Guidelines update of the US National Cholesterol 
Education Program (ATP III) for Americans and is one of three diets recommended by the Canadian 
Cardiovascular Society (CCS) guidelines for Canadians for 2012. He has received many National and 
International awards in recognition of his contribution to nutrition research. He believes in the value of 
plant based diets, and that a major effort is required to mount large studies to determine the extent of 
their health benefits. He also believes that diets have to be environmentally sustainable. 
 
The “Lifestyle Portfolio Trial” rationale and design 
With success of the PREDIMED study interest is renewed in dietary prevention and management of 
cardiovascular disease. However large intensive trials have been referred to by NHLBI as “Dinosaurs”. 
In this environment we are funded for a pilot study for a diet and exercise large international trial on 
CVD outcomes. The funding, or lack of, will however determine its future shape. 
 
Ideally we will recruit ~7,500 individuals internationally with known CVD, or three of more major risk 
factors. Participants will be instructed on the dietary portfolio and physical activity. Key foods will be 
provided as supplements on the test diet as well as the control. The study will last 8y with MACE as 
primary outcome. 
 
We believe such studies must be carried out internationally, with sufficient enrolment for conclusions 
to be reached using the same criteria that established the efficacy and effectiveness of statins. 
 

1.  Value of Nutritional Trials 
2.  In determining dietary advice to the needful food supplements to enhanced compliance 
3.  Issues related to subject selections and recruitments 
 

Learning objectives: 

 

 

 

43 
 

