 

Livia Augustin, PhD  
Dr. Augustin is a nutrition researcher at the Clinical Nutrition and Risk 
Factor Modification Centre at St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto (Canada).   
Her major interest is the investigation of dietary carbohydrate quality on 
chronic diseases.  Dr. Augustin hypothesized that the glycemic index may 
be relevant in carcinogenesis; she started and led the investigations of the 
glycemic index in cancer risk. Dr. Augustin conceived and co-organized 
the International Scientific Consensus Summit on the Glycemic Index, 
Glycemic Load and Glycemic Response (Stresa, 2013). She has been an 
invited speaker at international scientific meetings and she is a Visiting 
Professor at the University of Catania (Italy). Dr. Augustin has many 
scientific publications in peer-reviewed journals and textbook chapters on 
carbohydrate metabolism. She is a member and coordinator of the ICQC, 
member of the ASN, CNS and the EFSA expert database. Dr. Augustin 

serves as review editor and as reviewer for international scientific journals.  
 
International Carbohydrate Quality Consortium (ICQC) update 
The International Carbohydrate Quality Consortium (ICQC) is a non-profit, worldwide organization 
created in 2013 in response to scientific, governmental and public needs for more clarity on the 
science around dietary carbohydrates quality and health. Scientific world experts joined the two-day 
meeting in 2013 with the goal of summarizing the evidence on the possible impact of the glycemic 
index, on chronic disease and release a consensus statement. Our founders envisioned the 
organization to move the science forward by investigating the gaps and possible solutions, creating 
new collaborations, encouraging scientific dialogue and harmonizing the carbohydrate discussions 
within and between academia, industry and governmental bodies. In order to do this we planned to 
meet every two years. This presentation is a summary of the main points discussed at the ICQC 
meeting of June 9th 2015 in Toronto.  
 

Learning objectives: 

Industry perspective 

1.  What is the ICQC and what is its role? 
2.  Where are we at with carbohydrate research, labeling and guidelines?  
3. 
 
 

 

 

 

44 
 

