Oral Abstracts 

 
Oral Abstract 1 - African Food Pyramid  
(Sara Baer-Sinnott, USA) 
 
Health Through Heritage: Using Cultural Roots To Empower and Improve Health 
Oldways is well known for the Mediterranean Diet Pyramid, developed in 1993 by a scientific 
committee, and with the Harvard School of Public Health.  Oldways also developed four other cultural 
models for healthy eating – the Asian Diet Pyramid (1995); Latin American Diet Pyramid (1996); 
Vegetarian and Vegan Diet Pyramid (1997 and 2013); and an African Heritage Diet Pyramid, 
introduced in 2011.    
 
To put the African Heritage Diet Pyramid into practice, in 2013, Oldways created  “A Taste of African 
Heritage” – an innovative program that combines cultural history, nutrition education, and cooking 
lessons to empower and improve the well-being of African Americans by connecting them to the 
whole, plant-based foods of their ancestors. Led by volunteer teachers, “A Taste of African Heritage” 
has taken place in over 100 communities nationwide, and is growing steadily.   Oldways’ next series, 
“A Taste of Latin American Heritage” is set to pilot in 2016.  
  
This presentation will discuss the African Heritage Diet Pyramid and the benefits and successes of a 
culturally-inspired, grassroots approach to nutrition education. It will demonstrate how culturally-
relevant evidence-based nutrition and cooking information can be utilized as an effective tool for 
improving public health.   
 
 
Oral Abstract 2 - The effect of a vegetarian vs. conventional hypocaloric diet on   
serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants in patients with type 2 
diabetes  
(Hana Kahleová, Czech Republic) 
 
Hana  Kahleová1,  Serena  Tonstad2,  Jan  Rosmus3,  Fisar  P3,  Andrea  Mari4,  Martin  Hill5  and  Terezie 
Pelikanova1 
1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Videnska 1958/9, 140 21 Prague, Czech Republic 
2Department of Endocrinology, Morbid Obesity and Preventive Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway 
3State Veterinary Institute Prague, Sidlistni 24, 165 03 Prague, Czech Republic 
4C.N.R. (National Research Council) Institute of Systems Science and Biomedical Engineering, 
Padua, Italy 
5Institute of Endocrinology, Narodni 8, 11394 Prague, Czech Republic 
 
Objective: Emerging evidence suggests that environmental factors described as persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs) are involved in the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D). POPs may be present 
especially in fatty fish, fish and seafood, meat and dairy products. The aim of this study was to explore 
the effect of a vegetarian vs. conventional diet on serum levels of POPs in T2D patients after 12 
weeks of a dietary intervention. 
Methods: 74 subjects with T2D were randomly assigned to either follow a vegetarian diet without fish 
or meat (n=37) or a control group who followed an isocaloric conventional diabetic diet (n=37).  Both 
diets were calorie restricted (-500 kcal/day). To measure insulin sensitivity, the hyperinsulinemic (1 
mU.kg-1.min-1) isoglycemic clamp was conducted. β-cell function was assessed using a mathematical 
model after a test meal. Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen was performed to measure the 
amount of visceral fat. We measured serum levels of 44 POPs. Dioxins and dioxin-like POPs were 

46 
 

