3Department of Biostatistics, New Bolton Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA;  
4Clinical Research Unit, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL;  
5Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL;  
6Department of Human Studies, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL;  
7Ingredion Inc., Bridgewater, NJ. 
Email: bgower@uab.edu 
 
Objective: This study was designed to examine the effect of HAM-RS2 resistant starch on insulin 
sensitivity in women. 
Methods: Participants were 40 healthy pre- and postmenopausal women.  The study was conducted 
using a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind cross-over design.  HAM-RS2 (HI-MAIZE®260 
corn starch, Ingredion Incorporated, Bridgewater, NJ) was formulated into snack foods and tested at 
two doses, 15 and 30 g resistant starch per day.  An isocaloric snack formulated with a highly-
digestible waxy corn starch served as a control.  Each arm was 4 weeks, with a 4-week wash-out 
period between.  The main outcome was insulin sensitivity (SI) assessed at the end of each arm by 
Minimal Model.  Data were analyzed by mixed-effects modeling, adjusting for covariates. 
Results: Two Gaussian distributions for SI were identified, an insulin-resistant (IR) group (SI<7.8), and 
an insulin-sensitive (IS) group (SI>7.8).  Among IR participants, SI was on average 16% higher after 
the 30 g supplement when compared to the control (P=0.02). No effect of HAM-RS2 on insulin 
sensitivity was observed among IS participants. 
Conclusions:  Among insulin-resistant women, consumption of 30 g/d HAM-RS2 improved insulin 
sensitivity by 16%.  Because insulin resistance is a risk factor for diabetes, HAM-RS2 may be an 
appropriate dietary ingredient to reduce risk for diabetes in insulin-resistant women. 
Protocol registration: NCT0152806 
Funding source: Ingredion Incorporated, P30DK56336, P60DK079626, UL1RR025777 
 
 
Oral Abstract 8 – Linking microbial consumption of resistant starch to 
functional outcomes  
(Maria Marco, USA) 
 
Intestinal microorganisms have important beneficial roles in the regulation of energy homeostasis, lipid 
and glucose metabolism, and the immune system. Conversely, a dysbiotic gut microbiota is 
associated with obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic syndrome. Therefore, dietary 
approaches to modulate the composition and activities of the gut microbiota might be sufficient to 
protect and alleviate the symptoms against these chronic diseases. This presentation will describe 
recent highlights in the progress to unravel how dietary fermentable carbohydrates such as type 2 
resistant starch (RS) improve metabolic health. Specifically, findings from human and murine studies 
will presented with regard to the specific bacterial groups enriched with RS consumption and the 
impact of RS on the intestinal and serum metabolomes and gene expression in the intestine as well as 
distal sites in the body. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 

