 

Neal Barnard, M.D. 
Neal Barnard is an Adjunct Associate Professor of Medicine at the George 
Washington University School of Medicine in Washington, DC, and 
President of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine.   
 
Dr. Barnard has led numerous research studies investigating the effects of 
diet on diabetes, body weight, and chronic pain, including a groundbreaking 
study of dietary interventions in type 2 diabetes, funded by the National 
Institutes of Health. Dr. Barnard has authored more than 70 scientific 
publications as well as 17 books.   
 
As president of the Physicians Committee, Dr. Barnard leads programs 
advocating for preventive medicine, good nutrition, and higher ethical 

standards in research. He has hosted three PBS television programs on nutrition and health and is 
frequently called on by news programs to discuss issues related to nutrition and research.  
 
Originally from Fargo, North Dakota, Dr. Barnard received his M.D. degree at the George Washington 
University School of Medicine and completed his residency at the same institution. He practiced at St. 
Vincent’s Hospital in New York before returning to Washington to found the Physicians Committee.  
 
Vegetarian diets in diabetes 
Type 2 diabetes has become a major epidemic, often leading to serious complications and major 
costs. Although medications remain a mainstay of treatment, nutritional interventions have shown 
surprising power in both the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes. 
 Particular attention has been paid to plant-based diets. As a group, individuals following such diets 
have a lower diabetes prevalence, compared to others. They also tend to have lower plasma 
cholesterol levels and are less likely to be overweight.  
In clinical trials, plant-based diets have led to dramatic improvements in blood glucose control, plasma 
lipids, blood pressure, and body weight. The beneficial effect of the diet on glycemic control appears 
be mediated by (1) weight loss and (2) a reduction in intramyocellular lipid—the intracellular fat that 
leads to insulin resistance. This presentation will describe the rationale for these trials, their results, 
and how clinicians can put their findings to use. 
  

1.  Participants will understand the rationale for the use of plant-based diets in diabetes management. 
2.  Participants will understand the effect of diet interventions on blood glucose, lipids, and body 

Learning objectives: 

weight. 

3.  Participants will learn how to initiate and monitor therapeutic diets for patients with type 2 diabetes. 
 
 

 

6 
 

