Oral Abstract 9 - Raisin Intake, Glycemic Control and other Cardiovascular Risk   
factors in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus  
(James Painter, USA)  

 

James Painter, Arianna Carughi, Harold Bays 

 

Specific foods and dietary patterns may influence glycaemia and cardiovascular disease risk factors, 
and thus may have an impact on managing type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and cardiovascular 
disease (CVD).   Worldwide health agencies recommend individuals increase the intake of fruit for 
improved health maintenance, including patients with diabetes mellitus.  Traditional dried fruit without 
added sugar, such as raisins, are considered healthful foods and are a preferred snack because of 
their nutrient profile, which is rich in dietary fiber, potassium and health protective bioactive 
compounds.  Dried fruit, like all commonly consumed fruit, provide sugar (e.g., fructose and glucose) 
as the only caloric macronutrient.  This may raise concern for patients with diabetes mellitus regarding 
the potential to affect glycemic control.   However, raisins have a low glycemic index, resulting in a low 
potential for insulinemic and glycemic response.   While most fruits and vegetables have not 
undergone the rigors of objective clinical trial evaluation, a 12-week randomized controlled clinical 
study of 51 participants evaluated routine intake of raisins versus equicaloric, high carbohydrate 
processed snacks (e.g. crackers, crisps) on cardiometabolic risk factors in patients with T2DM.  Those 
who consumed raisins had a significant (p<.05) 23% reduction in postprandial glucose levels, a 19% 
reduction in fasting blood sugar and a 0.12 % reduction in hemoglobin A1c (p>.05) (NS).  Also 
compared to process snacks, raisins produced a significant 8.7mmHg reduction in systolic blood 
pressure, possibly due to potassium and other vasoactive raisin constituents.   Body weight, 
anthropometric measures, and blood lipid levels did not change. This data was generally consistent 
with another objective controlled trial of raisins among patients with hyperglycemia, but not diabetes 
mellitus.  Emerging data will be presented supporting the role of raisins and other traditional dried 
fruits as a healthy component of the daily diet, including patients with T2DM. 
 
 
Oral Abstract 10 - Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Artificially-
Sweetened Beverages and Type 2 Diabetes  
(Douglas Weed, USA) 
 
Douglas L. Weed, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D. (corresponding author), DLW Consulting Services LLC, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84103, Dominik D. Alexander, Ph.D., M.S.P.H., Cara L. Frankenfeld, Ph.D. 
Objective. Whether an association exists between artificially sweetened beverages (ASB) and type 2 
diabetes (T2D) is unclear.  We undertook a systematic literature search and meta-analysis of the 
existing epidemiological studies of ASB-T2DM. 
Materials and Methods. We searched PubMed and Scopus to identify prospective observational 
studies on ASB and T2DM.  Data collected from these studies were combined using random effects 
meta-analysis.  We identified possible confounders, assessed the control of confounding in the 
prospective studies, and calculated summary relative risks (SRREs) and 95% Confidence Intervals 
(CIs) including dose-response using actual data from the published studies.  Publication bias was 
assessed using funnel plots and Egger’s regression.  
Results. Seven studies met inclusion criteria. The pooled estimate for extreme categories of ASB 
intake for models fully adjusted for confounders was (SRRE = 1.12, 95% CI: 1.03 – 1.22; I2 =36%; 
N=7).  We did not observe evidence of a dose-response pattern. Statistical assessment of publication 
bias suggested evidence of selective reporting of positive findings; a tally of cohorts that have reported 
on diet and T2D (N=22) suggests that the ASB-T2D relationship is published in only a subset (N=7). 
Conclusions. The observed relationship between ASB and T2DM, although more homogeneous than 
previous estimates, remains a weak association lacking dose-response.  Approximately 15 studies 
exist with unpublished data on diet and T2DM, providing an argument for the need for further research 
on this controversial topic to address prominent uncertainties. 

51 
 

