Short Oral Abstracts 
 
Short Oral Abstract 1 - Diets naturally-rich in different polyphenols improve 
glucose metabolism: is the effect related to specific subclasses?   
(Claudia Vetrani, Italy) 
 
Claudia Vetrani1*, Marilena Vitale1, Lutgarda Bozzetto1, Giovanni Annuzzi1, Giuseppina Costabile1,2, 
Rosalba Giacco2, Giuseppe Della Pepa1, Ettore Griffo1,2, Anna Mangione1, Paola Cipriano1, Gabriele 
Riccardi1, Angela A Rivellese1 
 
1Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University, Naples, Italy; 2Institute of Food 
Science, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy. 
E-mail: claudia.vetrani@unina.it 
 
Objective: It is known that dietary long chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCn3) and polyphenols 
(PP) may influence glucose metabolism. However, evidence from clinical trials in humans still gives 
conflicting results. This randomized controlled study evaluated the effects of diets naturally rich in PP 
and/or LCn3 on glucose metabolism trying to highlight  any specific effect of different PP subclasses.  
Methods: Eighty-six individuals with high waist circumference and any other feature of the metabolic 
syndrome were randomized to one of four isoenergetic diets differing only for LCn3 and PP content: 
(A) poor in LCn3 and PP; (B) rich in LCn3; (C) rich in PP; (D) rich in LCn3 and PP. Before and after 
the 8-week intervention, insulin-sensitivity (OGIS) and β-cell function (ΔAUCinsulin/ΔAUCglucose) 
were derived from plasma glucose and insulin concentrations during 3-h OGTT. Moreover, correlation 
analyses were performed between dietary changes in PP subclasses and clinical outcomes. 
Results: PP-rich diets significantly reduced blood glucose AUC and increased insulin 30min-AUC 
(p<0.05 for PP effect, 2-way ANOVA), improving  also OGIS (p<0.05 C vs. A, one-way ANOVA). 
Correlation analyses indicated that changes of dietary flavons triggered the effect on glucose AUC (p= 
0.009) whereas those of anthocyanidins and flavan-3-ols were mainly related to early insulin secretion 
(p= 0.010 and p= 0.029; respectively). LCn3 significantly reduced β-cell function (p<0.05 for LCn3 
effect). 
Conclusions: Diets naturally rich in PP improve glucose tolerance, likely through an improved insulin 
sensitivity and early insulin secretion. Some subclasses of PP seem to be more effective.  
Protocol registration: clinicaltrials.gov identifier, NCT 01154478 
Funding Source: European Community (Contract no: FP7-KBBE-222639) and the Italian Ministry of 
the University (PRIN 2010-2011, No. 2010JCWWKM). 
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 2 - The Effect of α-linolenic Acid and Fish on Glucose 
Metabolism, Serum Lipid Profile and Low -grade Inflammation in Subjects with 
Impaired Glucose Metabolism  
(Maria Lankinen, Finland) 
 
Maria Lankinen*1, Vanessa De Mello Laaksonen1, Sudhir Kurl1, David Laaksonen2,3, Kari Pulkki4,5, Arja 
Erkkilä1, Ursula Schwab1,3 
1Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland; 2Institute of 
Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland; 3Institute of Clinical Medicine, Internal Medicine, Kuopio 
University Hospital; 4Institute of Clinical Medicine, Clinical Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland; 
5Eastern Finland Laboratory Centre ISLAB. 
Objective: Our aim was to examine whether α-linolenic acid (ALA), fatty fish and lean fish differ in 
their effects on glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism and inflammatory markers. 

53 
 

