Methods: Altogether 79 volunteers with elevated fasting plasma glucose (5.5-6.9 mmol/l), BMI 25-36 
kg/m2 and age 43 to 72 years participated in the 12-week parallel randomized controlled trial with four 
groups. The fatty fish group consumed 4 meals of fatty fish per week to provide ~ 1 g EPA and DHA 
per day. The lean fish group consumed 4 meals of lean fish per week. The ALA group ingested 
camelina sativa oil in order to get 10 g ALA per day. The control group consumed lean meat products. 
Control and ALA groups were allowed to eat 1 fish meal per week.  The study diets were isocaloric. 
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test 
(FSIGT) were performed and blood samples for analyses of serum lipid profile, fatty acids, 
inflammatory markers and metabolomics and lipidomics profiles were drawn at the beginning and at 
the end of the intervention. ANCOVA models adjusted for age, gender, use of statins and baseline 
value was used for comparing changes between the groups.  
Results: There were major changes in the fatty acid composition of phospholipids, cholesteryl esters 
and triglycerides in eicosapentaenoic acid, docosahexaenoic acid in the fatty fish group and ALA in 
the ALA group, which reflect good compliance to the diets. No significant changes in glucose and 
insulin metabolism were found based on OGTT or FSIGT. Concentrations of total and LDL cholesterol 
(C), LDL-C/HDL-C ratio and Apo B/Apo A-I ratio changed significantly differently between the groups. 
The biggest changes were seen in the ALA group where the total and LDL-C concentrations 
decreased compared with the fatty fish group and the lean fish group, and LDL-C/HDL-C and Apo 
B/Apo A-I ratios decreased compared with the lean fish group. Inflammatory markers - high sensitivity 
C-reactive protein (CRP), Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) and Interleukin 1 beta (IL-1 beta) - 
did not change during the intervention. 
Conclusion: The results suggest that a diet enriched in ALA could improve the serum lipid profile in 
subjects with impaired glucose metabolism. Changes in lipid metabolism are going to be studied in-
depth utilizing metabolomics and lipidomics methods. 
Protocol registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01768429 
Funding. Finnish Diabetes Research Foundation, Competitive Research Funding of the Northern 
Savo Hospital District special state subsidy for health research (VTR), Juho Vainio Foundation, 
Finnish Cultural Foundation, North Savo Regional Fund, Paavo Nurmi Foundation, Yrjö Jahnsson 
Foundation. 
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 3 - A High-Protein Diet Reduces Liver Fat Content and 
Improves Glomerular Filtration Rate in Subjects with Type 2 Diabetes   
(Mariya Markova, Germany) 
 
Mariya Markova*1, Silke Hornemann1, Stephanie Sucher1, Olga Pivovarova1,2, Andreas F.H. Pfeiffer1,2 
1Department of Clinical Nutrition, German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, 
Germany; 2Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité 
University Medicine, Berlin, Germany 
E-Mail: Mariya.Markova@dife.de 
 

Objective: Previous studies reported both favourable and adverse impacts of high-protein diet in type 
2 diabetes. In our study, we evaluated in detail the effects of two isocaloric high-protein diets of animal 
(AP) and plant (PP) origin in type 2 diabetic patients. 
Methods: Individuals with type 2 diabetes were randomized to either high-animal or high-plant protein 
diet (30% protein, 40% carbohydrates, 30% fat) for 6 weeks. The AP diet was rich in meat and dairy 
foods, while the PP group received products with high amount of dietary pulses and pea protein. Blood 
samples were collected every two weeks to measure routine parameters. Magnetic resonance 
imaging was performed at the beginning and at the end of the study. 
Results: The study included 30 subjects (age 65±6 years, BMI 30.5±3.6 kg/m2, HbA1c 7.0±0.6%). We 
observed reduction of cholesterol, LDL- and HDL-cholesterol in all participants. Levels of liver 
parameters (AST, ALT, GGT) in blood improved significantly after diet intervention in both groups. 

54 
 

