Conclusions: People who consistently participated in all phases have improved their eating habits, in 
relation to persons who participated occasionally in the study, which appeared to have worse eating 
habits. Also individuals with partial participation in the study showed greater weight gain rates. Finally, 
there was evidence that the constant participation in the study is associated with an increase in 
healthy daily habits.  
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 7 - Low-Carbohydrate Diets in the Management of Type 2 
Diabetes – A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis  
(Henny-Kristine Korsmo-Haugen, Norway) 
 
Henny-Kristine Korsmo-Haugen1*  
Anne-Marie Aas2 
1Department of Health, Nutrition and Management, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus 
University College of Applied Sciences, Kjeller, Norway;2Oslo University Hospital, Aker, Division of 
Medicine, Section of Nutrition and Dietetics / University of Oslo, Faculty of medicine, Oslo, Norway. 
E-mail: henny-kristine.haugen@griffithuni.edu.au 
 
Objective: Controversy still remains about the safety and efficacy of a low-carbohydrate diet (LCD) in 
the longer term management of type 2 diabetes. We conducted a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to investigate the effect of a LCD, containing ≤40 
energy percent (E%) from carbohydrates, compared with a higher carbohydrate diet (>40 E%), on 
weight management, metabolic control and compliance in adults with type 2 diabetes. 
Methods: We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, CENRTRAL, CINAHL, Food Science Source and 
SweMed+ (through November, 2013) for relevant trials of ≥3 months duration. Two independent 
reviewers assessed the validity of studies using Cochrane Collaborations Risk of Bias Tool. The 
GRADE approach was utilised to assess the quality of evidence for primary outcomes. Pooled effects 
were calculated by random effects meta-analyses and expressed as mean differences (MD) for 
continues outcomes, and risk ratio (RR) for dichotomous outcomes. Statistical heterogeneity was 
quantified by I2. 
Results: Eighteen RCTs, with a total of 1832 participants, met the inclusion criteria. Compared to the 
control diet, no significant effect was found in favour of the LCD on weight management (weight loss: 
MD -0.29 kg; 95% CI -1.17, 0.58) or HbA1c (MD -0.04%; 95% CI -0.14, 0.06). Furthermore, no 
significant difference was observed for blood concentrations of total-, LDL- and HDL-cholesterol, 
triacylglycerol, or blood pressure. Compliance, as measured by attrition rates, showed a small but 
non-significant effect in favour of the control diet (RR 1.03; 95% CI 0.87, 1.21). 
Conclusions: The findings from this meta-analysis suggest that LCDs may be an option in the long 
term management of type 2 diabetes but they are not superior to diets with a higher carbohydrate 
content regarding the effect on HbA1c, blood lipids, body weight and blood pressure. 
Protocol registration: http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/, CRD42013005825 
Funding Source: None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 

