Short Oral Abstract 8 - Fructose Containing Sugars-Sweetened Beverages and 
Their Contribution to Body Weight: a Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of 
Controlled Feeding Trials  
(Vivian L. Choo, Canada) 
 
Vivian L. Choo1,2, Russell J. de Souza1,3, Shana J. Kim1,2, Adrian I. Cozma1,2, Arash Mirrahimi1,2, Sonia 
Blanco Mejia1,2, Joseph Beyene3, Cyril W.C. Kendall 1,2, David J.A. Jenkins1,2,4-6, John L. 
Sievenpiper1,4,6 
 
1Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON; 
2Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON; 
3Department of Clinical Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON; 4Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON; 
5Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON; 6Li Ka Shing 
Knowledge Institute, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON 
 
Background: Sugars-sweetened beverages (SSBs) containing fructose are emerging as important 
public health targets in the epidemic of obesity.  
Objectives: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled feeding trials to assess 
the effect of fructose containing SSBs on body weight. 
Data sources: We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and the Cochrane Library (through May 
23, 2014). 
Data selection: Analyses included controlled dietary trials ≥7 days on the effect of fructose containing 
sugars in fluid form on body weight.   
Data extraction: Two independent reviewers extracted relevant data from eligible trials and assessed 
study quality. Data were pooled using the generic inverse variance method and expressed as mean 
differences (MD) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). Heterogeneity was assessed (Cochran’s Q 
statistic) and quantified (I2 statistic).   
Data Synthesis: We included 28 substitution trials (isocaloric comparison of fructose containing SSBs 
with other carbohydrates) (n=822), 26 addition trials (hypercaloric comparison of excess calories from 
fructose containing SSBs compared to a diet without SSBs) (n=1165), and 6 subtraction trials 
(hypocaloric comparison through a reduction in calories from fructose containing SSBs using water or 
low calorie sweetened beverages) (n=2707).  
Results: There was no effect of fructose containing SSBs in substitution trials, whereas fructose 
containing SSBs increased body weight in addition trials (MD, 0.59 kg [95% CI, 0.34 to 0.85]), and 
decreased body weight in subtraction trials (MD, -0.53 kg [95% CI, -1.02 to -0.03]).  
Conclusion: Pooled analyses show that fructose containing SSBs do not alter body weight when 
provided in isocaloric substitution for other carbohydrates. However, fructose containing SSBs do lead 
to weight gain when they supplement diets with excess calories and weight loss when their calories 
are displaced from diets by water or low calorie sweetened beverages, suggesting that the effects of 
fructose containing SSBs are mediated through their contribution of energy.  There is a need for 
larger, longer, higher quality trials that focus on ad libitum replacement of fructose containing SSBs 
with other sources of calories to inform public health policy. 
Protocol registration: clinicaltrials.gov identifier, NCT01608607. 
Funding: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) Knowledge Synthesis Grant (funding 
reference number, 102078), Calorie Control Council, and Banting and Best CIHR Graduate 
Scholarship (to VLC). 
 
 
 
 

58 
 

