Institute,  The  Hospital  for  Sick  Kids,  Toronto,  Ontario,  CANADA;  4Clinical  Nutrition  and  Risk  Factor 
Modification Centre, Toronto, Ontario, CANADA. 
 
Background:  Dietary  advice  in  pregnancy  is  a  key  strategy  promoted  to  prevent  and  manage 
gestational  diabetes  mellitus  (GDM).  However  the  evidence  to  support  various  healthful  dietary 
patterns to achieve optimal glycemic control in pregnant women has not been adequately synthesized.  
Objective:  To  conduct  a  systematic  review  and  network  meta-analysis  of  randomized  trials  of  ≥4 
week  duration  in  order  to  compare  the  relative  efficacy  of  healthful  dietary  patterns  on  measures  of 
glycemic  control  (fasting  blood  glucose  [FBG]  and  insulin  [FBI],  glycated  hemoglobin  [HbA1c], 
Homeostatic Model Assessment- Insulin Resistance [HOMA-IR]) in pregnant women. 
Methods:  MEDLINE,  EMBASE,  and  COCHRANE  (to  July  2014)  were  used  to  identify  randomized 
trials of dietary patterns for glycemic control during pregnancy. Two independent reviewers extracted 
relevant  study  characteristics  and  data.  A  network  meta-analysis  using  a  Bayesian  framework  and 
random-effects model was conducted to estimate the effectiveness of dietary patterns on FBG. Owing 
to  a  lack  of  trials  that  met  the  inclusion  criteria,  we  conducted  pair-wise  meta-analyses  using  fixed-
effects model with generic inverse variance  weighting for FBI and HOMA-IR. There were insufficient 
trials to conduct a meta-analysis for HbA1c.  
Results:  Twelve studies with a median follow-up duration of 13 weeks met our inclusion criteria (n= 
1869). There were no significant differences for any of the dietary comparisons (routine care, energy-
restricted,  high-fibre,  low  glycemic  index,  Dietary  Approach  to  Stop  Hypertension  [DASH]  diets)  on 
FBG.  Pair-wise  meta-analyses  between  high-fibre  and  low  glycemic  index  diets  also  did  not  show 
significant differences on FBI and HOMA-IR. 
Limitation: <5 trials were identified for comparisons between diets. 
Conclusions: The preliminary results from these analyses demonstrated that there are no significant 
differences  between  diets  on  FBG,  FBI,  and  HOMA-IR.  Larger  trials  of  higher  quality  are  needed  to 
confirm these results. 
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 11 - Cross-Sectional Associations of Plasma Fatty Acid 
Composition with Plasma Concentration of Leptin in Finnish Children   
(Taisa M Venäläinen, Finland) 
 
Taisa  M  Venäläinen*1,2,  Vanessa  DF  de  Mello2,  Ursula  S  Schwab2,  Jyrki  J  Ågren1,  Aino-Maija 
Eloranta1, Virpi I Lindi1, Timo A Lakka1 
1Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland; 2Institute of Public Health and 
Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland 
 
Objective: We investigated the associations of proportions of fatty acids in plasma cholesteryl esters 
(CE), phospholipids (PL) and triacylglycerols (TG) with plasma concentration of leptin among Finnish 
children.  
Methods:  The  subjects  were  a  population  sample  of  376  children  aged  6-8  years  examined  at 
baseline  in  the  Physical  Activity  and  Nutrition  in  Children  (PANIC)  study.  Plasma  fatty  acid 
composition  was  measured  by  gas  chromatography  and  plasma  concentration  of  leptin  by 
radioimmunoassay. Data were analyzed using linear regression models. 
Results: Higher proportions of myristic acid and lower proportions of cis-vaccenic acid in plasma CE, 
PL  and  TG  were  associated  with  higher  plasma  concentration  of  leptin. In  CE,    higher  proportion  of 
gamma-linolenic  acid  and  lower  proportion  of  arachidonic  acid  were  associated  with  higher  leptin 
concentration.  In  PL,  higher  proportion  of  linoleic  acid  and  lower  proportions  of  nervonic  and 
arachidonic  acids  were  associated  with  higher  leptin  concentration.  In  TG,  higher  proportions  of 
palmitic,  stearic  and  gamma-linolenic  acids  and  lower  proportions  of  linoleic,  oleic,  cis-vaccenic  and 
docosapentaenoic acids were related to higher leptin concentration.  

60 
 

