 

Ursula Schwab, PhD 
Ursula Schwab, PhD, is an associate professor (nutrition therapy) at the 
University of Eastern Finland (UEF). She works also as a clinical nutritionist 
at the Kuopio University Hospital. Her expertise is in planning and 
conducting randomized controlled dietary interventions regarding e.g. the 
effects of dietary fat, fish, berries and whole grain products, and the healthy 
Nordic dietary pattern on lipid and glucose metabolism including 
nutrigenomics, lipidomics and metabolomics approaches. Her research 
group is partly funded by the Spearhead funding of UEF. She has been 
involved in the updating of the Nordic and Finnish Nutrition 
Recommendations, and several national good practice guidelines.  
 

Dietary patterns rich in healthy oils in diabetes 
Ursula Schwab, PhD, Associate Professor (nutrition therapy).  School of Medicine, Institute of Public 
Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio campus.  Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital 
 
Quality of dietary fat is of significant importance in the recommended diet for diabetics. Current 
recommendations both in Europe and Northern America are very consistent regarding the quality of 
dietary fat, i.e. the proportion of saturated fat is recommended to be below 7-10 % of energy intake. 
Fish is recommended to be part of the supply of unsaturated fat in the diet, but daily use of highly 
unsaturated vegetable oils is essential in order to meet the recommendations. In diabetes prevention 
studies the quality of dietary fat has been one of the key aspects along with weight loss / weight 
maintenance, quality of carbohydrates / amount of dietary fiber, and physical exercise. Furthermore, 
there is convincing evidence that the quality of dietary fat is of importance for serum lipid profile. There 
is also evidence to some degree regarding insulin sensitivity, blood pressure, low grade inflammation 
and fat accumulation in the liver.  
 

1.  Recommendations of the quality of dietary fat in diabetes  
2.  Role of unsaturated fat in prevention of type 2 diabetes  
3.  Metabolic significance of the quality of dietary fat 
 

Learning objectives: 

 

 

7 
 

