Conclusions:  Higher  proportions  of  gamma-linolenic  acid  and  SFA,  especially  myristic  acid,  and 
lower  proportions  of  many  MUFA  and  PUFA  in  plasma  are  associated  with  plasma concentration  of 
leptin in  children.  Fatty  acids  in  plasma  TG  fraction  seem  to  have  the  strongest  associations  with 
plasma leptin concentration. 
Protocol registration: Clinical trial number NCT01803776. 
Funding:  The  Finnish Cultural  Foundation,  the  Juho  Vainio  Foundation,  the  Finnish  Foundation  of 
Cardiovascular Research. 
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 12 - Comparison of Glycemic Outcome and Relation to 
Changes in Liver Fat Content in Low -carb vs. Low-fat Dietary Regimes for 
Prediabetic Subjects  
(Stefan Kabisch, Germany) 
 
Stefan Kabisch1,2*, Ulrike Kaiser1, Margrit Kemper1,2, Christiana Gerbracht1, Caroline Honig1, Andreas 
F.H. Pfeiffer1,2,3. 
1German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Department of Clinical Nutrition, Nuthetal  
2 German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Munich  
3 Charité University Hospital Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin 
stefan.kabisch@dife.de  
 
Objective: Dietary strategies basing on the main nutrient components have been widely compared for 
their effectiveness in weight loss, weight maintenance and several metabolic outcomes. However, 
short- and long-term effects on glucose levels and liver fat content are controversially discussed. 
Furthermore, the interaction between weight loss, glycemic improvement and reduction of liver fat 
content is unclear. 
Methods: In a subcohort of the Prediabetes Lifestyle Intervention Study (PLIS; n=99) we conducted a 
two-step dietary intervention with two different regimes. The initial three-weeks phase was hypocaloric 
(ca. 1500 kcal/day), the second phase (11 months) was isocaloric. We compared a low-carb regime 
(short term: < 40 g carbohydrates/day, long term: < 40 % of daily energy intake) and a low-fat diet (fat 
intake < 30 % of daily energy intake). Metabolic assessment throughout the study based on 2-hours 
oral glucose tolerance tests and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (liver fat).  
Results: While both interventions show a similar statistically significant short-term reduction and long-
term maintenance of glucose levels and liver fat content, only short-term reductions in fasting glucose 
levels appear to be significantly pronounced in the low-carb group (p=0,002). Correlation analysis 
shows, that despite similar magnitude of metabolic changes, liver fat reduction under low-fat diet is 
tightly linked to weight loss (p=0,003), but not in the low-carb group (p=0,17). 
Limitations: Our data are preliminary results from an ongoing study. The final subcohort of PLIS will 
sum up about 200 subjects with one year of intervention and two additional years of follow-up. 
Conclusions: Low-carb and low-fat diets are similarly effective to reduce glycemic parameters and 
liver fat content. However, the underlying mechanisms appear to differ regarding dietary composition. 
Further analysis will show, under which conditions weight loss is really necessary to achieve metabolic 
improvements. 
Protocol registration: NCT01947595 (clinicaltrials.gov) 
Funding Source: Federal Ministry of Education and Research  
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 

