Short Oral Abstract 13 - The Effects of Dietary Glycemic Load on Plasma 
Proteomic Biomarkers  
(Joseph Jamnik, Canada) 
 
Joseph Jamnik1*, Christoph H. Borchers2, and Ahmed El-Sohemy1 
1Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 
2University of Victoria-Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, 
BC, Canada. 
 
Background: The consumption of diets with a high glycemic load (GL) has been associated with an 
increased risk of type II diabetes and other chronic conditions. However, the effects of dietary GL on 
emerging risk factors for such conditions are unclear. 
Objective: To determine the association between dietary GL and plasma proteomic biomarkers 
involved in diverse physiological pathways in a population of healthy young adults. 
Methods: Subjects (n=1,100) were young adults from the cross-sectional Toronto Nutrigenomics and 
Health Study. Dietary GL was estimated using a one month 196-item Toronto-modified Willett food 
frequency questionnaire. The absolute concentrations of 54 plasma proteins were measured using a 
multiple reaction monitoring HPLC-MS/MS assay. The association between dietary GL and each 
proteomic biomarker was examined using general linear models adjusted for age, sex, BMI, physical 
activity, ethnicity, total energy intake and hormonal contraceptive use among women.  
Results: Dietary GL was inversely associated with circulating concentrations of apolipoprotein A-I, a 
negative acute phase reactant involved in lipid metabolism and a major constituent of HDL cholesterol 
(p=0.0003). Additional adjustment for serum HDL levels attenuated the association, suggesting that 
the effects of GL on apolipoprotein A-I are driven by changes in HDL.  
Conclusions: These findings provide further evidence for the beneficial effects of a low GL diet on 
blood lipid profiles. 
Funding Source: Advanced Foods and Materials Network  
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 14 - Serum Non-Esterified Fatty Acid (NEFA) Concentrations 
are Associated with Longitudinal Progression of β -Cell Dysfunction: 
Prospective Metabolism and Islet Cell Evaluation (PROMISE) Cohort   
(Luke W. Johnston, Canada) 
 
Luke W. Johnston*1, Christine Lee1, Stewart Harris2, Ravi Retnakaran3, Bernard Zinman3,4, Richard P. 
Bazinet1, Anthony J. Hanley1,3,5 
1 Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto; 2 Centre for Studies in Family Medicine, 
University of Western Ontario, London, CA; 3 Division of Endocrinology, University of Toronto; 4 
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto; 5 Dalla Lana School of Public 
Health, University of Toronto. 
 
Objective: Elevated fasting NEFA concentrations are associated with incident type 2 diabetes 
(T2DM), however NEFA are physiologically diverse. Limited longitudinal data exist examining total and 
individual NEFA on the progression of metabolic disorders underlying T2DM. Our aim was to study the 
longitudinal associations of total and individual NEFA with insulin sensitivity (IS) and β-cell function. 
Methods: Adults at-risk for T2DM in PROMISE had glucose and insulin measured from a glucose 
tolerance test at 3 visits over 6-yrs (n=478). Baseline NEFA were analyzed using thin-layer-
chromatography and gas-liquid-chromatography with flame-ionization detector. The inverse of HOMA-
IR (HOMA-IS) and the Matsuda index assessed IS, while the Insulinogenic Index over HOMA-IR 
(IGI/IR) and the Insulin Secretion-Sensitivity Index-2 (ISSI-2) assessed β-cell function. Dysglycemia 
was defined as incident pre-diabetes or T2DM. Generalized estimating equations was performed 
adjusting for waist, physical activity, alcohol, and sex. 

62 
 

