Results: IS and β-cell function decreased over 6-yrs by 14-24.3% (all p<0.001; Fig. A-B); although 
BMI or WC did not change (<2%). Conversion to dysglycemia was ~12% over 6-yrs, where higher 
total NEFA increased the risk by 25% (RR=1.25 (1.02-1.52) per SD). While total NEFA were not 
associated with IS, palmitate predicted declines in HOMA-IS (p=0.037). Higher total NEFA predicted 
declines in IGI/IR and ISSI-2 (both p<0.02; Fig. C), with higher concentrations of palmitate, oleate, and 
linoleate predicting declines in ISSI-2 (p=0.003 to 0.043); these three species comprised 74.8% of 
total NEFA. 
Conclusions: Given that palmitate, oleate, and linoleate comprise the majority of the NEFA pool, our 
findings suggest that total NEFA rather than individual species may more strongly influence T2DM 
risk, primarily through β-cell dysfunction. 
Funding: Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Canadian Diabetes Association, Banting and Best 
Diabetes Center 
 
 
Short Oral Abstract 15 –  Increase in angiotensin converting enzyme in 
response to a high fat diet  
(Rita Schüler, Germany) 
 
Rita Schüler1*, Martin A Osterhoff1,2, Turid Frahnow1, Anne-Cathrin Seltmann1, Stefan Kabisch1,2, Silke 
Hornemann1, Michael Kruse1, Andreas FH Pfeiffer1,2 
1German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbrücke (DIfE), Department of Clinical Nutrition, 
Nuthetal, Germany; 2Charité-University Medicine Berlin Campus Benjamin Franklin, Department of 
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Berlin, Germany. 
 
Objective: In addition to an effective treatment in cardiovascular diseases, inhibition of angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) also improves insulin sensitivity. On the contrary, carriage of the D-allele of 
the ACE insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism is associated with increased ACE serum levels and 
impaired glucose tolerance. We aimed to investigate effects of a high-fat diet (HF) on ACE considering 
possible nutrigenetic effects. 
Methods: In the NUGAT (NUtriGenomic Analysis in Twins) study 46 healthy twin pairs went from a 6-
week carbohydrate-rich low-fat diet (LF) to a 6-week HF diet under isocaloric conditions. Clinical 
investigation days (CIDs) took place after 6 weeks LF and after 1 and 6 weeks of HF. At each CID 
subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies were taken for gene expression analysis on Agilent 8x60K 
microarrays. Serum parameters were analyzed in blood samples using ELISA. To assess insulin 
sensitivity intravenous glucose tolerance tests (ivGTT) were performed and incremental areas under 
the curve (AUC) calculated. Genomic DNA extracted from whole blood was genotyped using Illumina 
HumanOmniExpressExome BeadChips. 
Results: After six weeks HF circulating ACE levels increased by 15% (HF6 161±49 ng/ml vs. LF 
139±41 ng/ml; p<0.001) paralleled by an increase in adipose tissue gene expression (1.41-fold, 
p<0.001). Interestingly, in homozygous carriers (GG) of the rs4343 polymorphism, which serves as a 
surrogate marker for ACE I/D polymorphism, the increase in serum levels was nearly twice as high as 
compared to non-carriers (AA) or heterozygous carriers (AG) (p<0.001). Whereas no change in 
glucose tolerance was observed for AA/AG-carriers, glucose tolerance significantly declined in GG-
carriers after six weeks of HF (ΔAUCglucose, recessive model: p=0.009).  
Conclusions: ACE might constitute a molecular link between dietary fat intake and cardiovascular 
diseases as well as impaired glucose metabolism. The extent of this relationship seems to be 
nutrigenetically modulated.  
Protocol registration: www.ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT01631123 
Funding Source: German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Grant No. 0315424) 

 

63 
 

 

