Objective: Sweet taste receptors are stimulated by natural carbohydrates but also non-caloric natural 
and artificial sweeteners, for example in energy-reduced softdrinks. Epidemiological studies suggest 
associations between those dietary components and the development of metabolic diseases. The 
reason for this relationship might be found in an unfavorable incretin release after ingestion of 
artificially sweetened food. As a result from the SEGATROM study, we are conducting the ILIAS 
project which aims to highlight possible selective properties of certain sweeteners and to assess the 
real-life effects under prolonged stimulation.  
Methods: First, we will focus on short-term effects of several artificial sweeteners with different 
chemical structures. Additionally, a four-week stimulation with or without AS in a cross-over design is 
scheduled. As in SEGATROM, oral stimulation tests will be conducted. Plasma levels for glucose, 
insulin, GIP, GLP-1 and PYY will be assessed until 120 minutes after ingestion. 
Results: The sweetener trials of the already completed SEGATROM study focussed primarily on 
saccharin, an AS with both sweet and bitter taste. Preliminary results show significantly higher insulin, 
GIP and GLP-1 levels under combined saccharin-glucose stimulation compared to glucose alone. 
PYY levels remained similar. Saccharin alone did not reliably seem to stimulate incretin release. 
Conclusions/Outlook: The preliminary results from SEGATROM support the hypothesis, that food 
containing AS (e.g. softdrinks) may facilitate metabolic derangements, possibly by disturbing a 
beneficial incretin profile. As saccharin also stimulates bitter receptors, the role of sweet taste 
receptors could not entirely be clarified by the SEGATROM study, thus requiring a broader 
experimental design. We will investigate, if other sweeteners show similar or different effects, if co-
administration of glucose is mandatory for the incretin release and if long-term effects on insulin 
sensitivity can be detected after four weeks of continuous stimulation.  
Protocol registration: NCT02219295 (clinicaltrials.gov) 
Funding Source: Federal Ministry of Education and Research  
 
 
3.    PREVIEW: Prevention of diabetes through lifestyle intervention and population 

studies in Europe and around the world - more than 2,000 volunteers randomized 
to the 3-y intervention trial  

(Jennie Brand-Miller) 
 
Anne Raben1, Mikael Fogelholm2, Thomas M Larsen1, Mathijs Drummen3, Sally Poppitt4, J Alfredo 
Martinez5, Ian Macdonald6, Svetoslav Handjiev7, Gareth Stratton8, Edith Feskens9, Tony Lam10, 
Wolfgang Schlicht11, Jennie Brand-Miller*12, on behalf of the PREVIEW consortium 
1Dep Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen, 2Dep Food & Environmental Sciences, 
University of Helsinki, 3Department of Human Biology, Maastricht University, 4Human Nutrition 
University, University of Auckland, 5Department of Nutrition, University of Navarra, 6School of Life 
Sciences, University of Nottingham, 7Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical University 
Sofia, 8College of Engineering, Swansea University, 9Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen 
University, 10Net Union, Lausanne, 11Department of Sport & Exercise Science, University of Stuttgart, 
12Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney 
 
Objective: PREVIEW is a 6-y EU project (2013-2018) under the FP7, KBBE programme. It involves 
15 partners from Europe, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. The primary goal is to identify the 
most efficient lifestyle pattern for the prevention of type-2 diabetes (T2D) in a population of pre-
diabetic overweight and obese individuals.  
Methods: The project comprises 2 main lines of evidence: a 3-y multicentre, 2x2 factorial, clinical, 
randomized controlled trial (RCT) with up to 2,500 participants as well as large population studies in 
about 170,000 individuals across all age groups. This presentation is focused on the RCT.  
The impact of a high-protein, low-glycemic index diet vs a moderate protein, moderate-glycemic index 
diet in combination with moderate or high intensity physical activity on the incidence of T2D and 

65 
 

