Anthony Hanley, PhD 
Dr. Hanley received his PhD in epidemiology from the University of Toronto in 
2000, and was subsequently a post-doctoral fellow in the Division of Clinical 
Epidemiology, University of Texas Health Sciences Centre at San Antonio.  
From 2002-2005 he was a research scientist in the Leadership Sinai Centre 
for Diabetes at Mount Sinai Hospital.  Since 2005 he has been a faculty 
member of the Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, 
where he is currently an associate professor and holds a Tier II Canada 
Research Chair in Diabetes Epidemiology.   
 
Dr. Hanley’s research interests include the metabolic and nutritional 
epidemiology of obesity, insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, with a 

particular focus on diabetes in Aboriginal Canadian communities and other high-risk populations.   
 
Dietary patterns rich in dairy in diabetes prevention 
An increasing body of scientific evidence, including several recent meta-analyses of prospective 
cohort studies, has documented inverse associations of dairy consumption with risk of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM).  Further, specific dietary patterns containing higher amounts of dairy (including 
DASH) have also been reported to be inversely associated with T2DM.  While the precise 
mechanisms through which dairy intake may reduce T2DM risk are not known, dairy products contain 
a number of components that may impact one or more of the key underling pathophysiological 
disorders of T2DM. These components include calcium and vitamin D (which have been positively 
associated with insulin sensitivity and beta cell function), whey protein (which is thought to improve 
glycemic control), and individual dairy-associated fatty acids, including 15:0, trans 16:1n-7, and c9,t11 
conjugated linoleic acid.  These fatty acids may simply represent reliable biomarkers of dairy intake, or 
alternatively, one or more may have bioactivity relevant to diabetes pathogenesis.  This presentation 
will provide an overview of current research on dairy, its components and risk of T2DM. 
 

Learning objectives: 

1.  Recent epidemiological literature on the association of dairy products with risk of type 2 diabetes; 
2.  The nutritional components of dairy products and their impact on the underlying pathophysiological 
disorders of type 2 diabetes; 
3.  Emerging literature on fatty acids that are specific to dairy, their potential mechanisms in the 
context of type 2 diabetes, and their possible utility as biomarkers of dairy intake;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 

