15.    Effects of FTO on Obesity-related Anthropometrics are modulated by Age, 
Physical Activity and Artificially Sweetened Beverages: results from The HUNT Study 
(Ingrid Lovold Mostad) 
 
Ingrid L Mostad1,2*, Thea Bjørnland3, Mette Langaas3, Valdemar Grill2 
1Department of Clinical Nutrition, Clinic of Clinical Service, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim University 
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway; 2Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway; 3Department of 
Mathematical Sciences, Faculty of Information Technology, Mathematics and Electrical Engineering, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 
E-mail: ingrid.l.mostad@ntnu.no 
 
Objective: To test for interactions of non-genetic factors with effects of FTO 
Methods: The two outermost quartiles of waist-hip-ratio in the HUNT3 all adult population survey was 
genotyped for FTO (rs9939609). We analysed data emerging from this extreme phenotype sampling 
by complete response analysis, by estimating effects of environmental exposures as well as genetic 
effects, separately for men and women in age groups 20-40, 40-60 and 60-80 years. We tested for 
interaction effects between FTO and non-genetic factors by stratification on the non-genetic factors in 
the 40-60 year age group. A P-value < 6.5x10-4 was considered significant after Bonferroni correction. 
Results: In the 40-60 year age group (7944 women, 6694 men) anthropometric measurements 
confirmed that the FTO minor frequency allele (A-allele, MAF 0.42) was associated with  increases in 
waist-hip-ratio, BMI, body weight, waist and hip circumference, but not height. Effect sizes were similar 
but not significant in the 60-80 year age (3948 women, 4084 men) whereas they were lower in the 20-
40 year age group (4816 women, 3273 men). Reported high physical activity reduced the FTO effect 
in women and reversed the effect in men, as evident from non-overlapping confidence intervals. Intake 
of artificially sweetened beverages significantly modulated effects of FTO on waist circumference in 
women, the effect size of the risk allele being  larger for regular drinkers vs never drinkers. Smoking 
(in a comparison ever vs. never) tended to increase the impact of the risk allele in men but not in 
women.  
 
Conclusions: In this Norwegian population the effect of the FTO obesity risk allele is modulated by 
age, physical activity and drinking artificially sweetened beverages, with a tendency also for interaction 
with smoking. The findings highlight the importance of interaction between environmental and genetic 
risk factors for obesity. 
Funding: Liaison Committee between the Central Norway RHA and NTNU. 
 
 
16.    Plasma fatty acids as predictors of glycemia and type 2 diabetes – METSIM Study 
(Maria Lankinen) 
 
Maria Lankinen*1, Alena Stančáková2, Matti Uusitupa1,4, Jyrki Ågren3, Jussi Pihlajamäki1,5, Johanna 
Kuusisto2,6, Ursula Schwab1,7, Markku Laakso2,6 
1Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, 2Institute of Clinical Sciences, Internal Medicine and 
3Institute of Biomedicine Physiology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio Finland and 4Research 
Unit, 5Clinical Nutrition and Obesity Center, 6Department of Medicine and 7Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, Internal Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.  
 
Objective: Our aim was to investigate the fasting proportions of fatty acids (FAs) and estimated 
desaturase and elongase activities in three different lipid fractions in plasma, phospholipids (PL), 
cholesteryl esters (CE) and triglycerides (TG), as predictors for the worsening of glycemia (area under 
the glucose curve in an oral glucose tolerance test, Glucose AUC) and incident type 2 diabetes 
(T2DM) in a 5.9-y follow-up of the population-based METSIM cohort. 

74 
 

