Conclusions: Benefits of a higher FV or FV-flavonoid intake for type 2 diabetes risk markers may be 
partly attributable to the lower dietary GI associated with a preferred consumption of these foods or 
nutrients. 
Protocol registration: not applicable 
Funding source: Wereld Kanker Onderzoek Fonds (WCRF NL) (grant 2013/975) 
 
 
18.  Liquid calories from sugars do not increase body weight more than solid calories: 

A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Controlled Feeding Trials 

(Jarvis Noronha) 
 
Jarvis Clyde Noronha*12, Vivian Choo12, Sonia Blanco Mejia2, Effie Viguiliouk12, Viranda Jayalath2, 
Cyril WC Kendall123, John L. Sievenpiper1245 
1Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 2Toronto 3D 
Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, Risk Factor Modification Center, St. Michael’s Hospital, 
3College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, 4Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. 
Michael’s Hospital, 5Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St. Michael’s Hospital. 
 
Objective: Although liquid calories from sugars have been shown to be more poorly compensated 
than solid calories in pooled analyses of acute preload trials, it is unclear whether they contribute more 
to weight gain over the longer term. To synthesize the evidence of the effect of liquid calories from 
sugars versus solid calories on body weight in controlled trials.  
Methods: We searched Medline, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library through September 15, 2014. We 
included controlled trials of > 7 days investigating the effect of liquid calories from sugars in exchange 
for solid calories from various sources on body weight. Two independent reviewers extracted relevant 
data as well as assessed study quality (Heyland methodological quality score) and risk of bias 
(Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool). Data were pooled using the generic inverse variance method and 
expressed as mean differences (MD) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Heterogeneity was 
assessed (Cochran Q statistic) and quantified (I2 statistic).  
Results: Six trials involving 84 participants met the eligibility criteria. The exchange of liquid calories 
from sugars for solid calories from various carbohydrates did not lead to significant weight gain (MD= 
0.14 kg (95% CI -2.24 kg to 2.53 kg) over a median follow-up of 6-weeks. There was no evidence of 
inter-study heterogeneity (I2 = 0%).  Most trials were of high quality without any serious risk of bias. 
Conclusion: Pooled analyses failed to show that liquid calories from sugars result in weight gain 
compared to solid calories from different carbohydrates. The small number and short duration of the 
available trials are important sources of uncertainty. There remains a need for larger and longer high 
quality trials. 
Funding: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (funding reference number, 129920) through 
the Canada-wide Human Nutrition Trialists’ Network (NTN) and PSI foundation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 

