19.  Sugar-sweetened beverages and type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of observational 

prospective studies 

(Douglas Weed) 
 
Douglas L. Weed, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., DLW Consulting Services LLC, Salt Lake City, UT 84103, 
Dominik D. Alexander, Ph.D., M.S.P.H., Cara L. Frankenfeld, Ph.D.  
 
Background.  Whether an association exists between sugar-sweetened beverages (SSB) and type 2 
diabetes (T2D) is unclear.  We undertook a meta-analysis of observational studies to examine this 
issue.  
 
Methods. We searched PubMed and Scopus to identify prospective observational studies on SSB 
and T2DM.  Data were combined using random effects meta-analysis.  We identified possible 
confounders, assessed the control of confounding, and calculated summary relative risks (SRREs) 
and 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs) including dose-response.  Publication bias was assessed using 
funnel plots and Egger’s regression.  
Results. Eight studies met inclusion criteria. The summary estimate for extreme categories of SSB 
intake across fully adjusted models (SRRE=1.16; 95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.26) relative to the 
age-adjusted models (SRRE=1.47) resulted in a large (66%) attenuation in T2D risk and decreased 
the variance due to statistical heterogeneity (85% to 37%). A dose-dependent increase in risk was 
observed for categories of SSB intake up to 1 serving/day, although not for the highest serving 
category (2+/day). Many confounding factors influenced the SSB-T2D association, which differed for 
each selected study. Statistical examination did not suggest publication bias; however, a tally of 
cohorts that have reported on diet and T2D (N=22) suggests that the SSB-T2D relationship has been 
published in only a subset (N=8).  
Conclusion. Although positive associations between SSB intake and T2D were observed in several 
meta-analysis models, interpretation is complicated by confounding and the potential for selective 
reporting of results across cohort studies.  
Source of Support: Funding was provided by The Coca-Cola Company.  By contractual agreement, 
all decisions regarding the content of the manuscript—including design, analysis, and interpretation—
rest solely with the authors. 
 
 
20.  Effect of a Low-Glycemic Index/Load Diet on Body Weight: A Systematic Review 

and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials 

(Catherine Braunstein) 
 
Catherine R. Braunstein*12, Cyril WC Kendall234, Vivian Choo23, Sonia Blanco Mejia2, Vanessa Ha25, 
Livia Augustin2, Cyril WC Kendall234, John L. Sievenpiper2367 
1 New College, University of Toronto, 2Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, Risk 
Factor Modification Center, St. Michael’s Hospital, 3Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, 4College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, 
5Department of Clinical Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Faculty of health Sciences, McMaster University, 
6 Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institue, St. Michael’s Hospital, 7Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
St. Michael’s Hospital. 
 
Objective: It is unclear whether low glycemic index and load diets contribute to weight loss. To 
synthesize the evidence of the effect of low glycemic index/load (GI/GL) diets on body weight in order 
to inform clinical practice guidelines. 
 
 
 

77 
 

