Methods: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effect of a low GI/GL diet on 
body  weight.  We  searched  databases  Medline,  EMBASE,  and  Cochrane  Library  (through  June  26 
2014).  We  selected  randomized  controlled  trials  ≥12  weeks  in  duration  reporting  body  weight.  The 
intervention diet was either low GI or GL compared against high GI/GL diets. We extracted all relevant 
data, which was pooled using the generic inverse variance method using random effects models and 
expressed as mean differences (MD)  with 95%  CIs. Heterogeneity  was  assessed by the Cochran Q 
statistic  and  quantified  by  the  I2  statistic.  Study  quality  was  assessed  using  the  Heyland 
Methodological  Quality  Score  (MQS)1  and  to  assess  risk  of  bias  the  Cochrane  Collaboration  Risk of 
Bias Tool2 was used.  
Results:  Eligibility criteria were met by 28 RCTs (31 comparisons) including 2,778 participants who 
were healthy (n=43), had type 2 diabetesmellitus (n=693), was overweight or obese (n=2382), or had 
the metabolic syndrome (n=448).  Low GI/GL diets did not significantly decrease body weight 
compared to high GI/GL diets (MD= -0.44kg (95% Cis -0.92, 0.05 kg)) with evidence of substantial 
heterogeneity (p<0.05). Most of the trials were of short duration (<12 weeks) and of poor quality 
(MQS<8).  
Limitations: Most of the trials were of short duration (<12 weeks) and of poor quality (MQS<8) with 
substantial unexplained inter-study heterogeneity.  
Conclusion: Low GI/GL diets do not lead to significantly more weight loss than high GI/GL diets. To 
address the sources of uncertainty, there is a need for larger, longer, higher quality trials.  
Funding: The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (funding reference number, 129920) through 
the Canada-wide Human Nutrition Trialists’ Network (NTN) and PSI foundation.  
 
 
21.  Starch Intake and Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-

Analysis of Prospective Cohorts 

(Sandhya Pudaruth) 
 
Sandhya Sahye-Pudaruth1, 2, & 3, Sonia Blanco Mejia1, 2, David Jenkins1, 2, 3,4, 5, 6, & 7, Ann Fox 1, 3, John L. 
Sievenpiper1, 2, 4, & 5  
1Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
2Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, Risk Factor Modification Center, St. 
Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada,  3Dalla Lana School Public Health, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada  4Clinical Nutrition and Risk Factor Modification Centre, St. Michael’s Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada, 5Keenan Research Center of the Li Ka Shing  Knowledge Institute, St. Michael’s 
Hospital, Toronto, Canada, 6Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,   St. Michael’s Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada, 7Department of Medicine Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada. E-mail: sandhya.sahye.pudaruth@utoronto.ca 
 
Objective: To investigate the association between starch intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes. 
Methods: MEDLINE, EMBASE, and The Cochrane Registry were searched through February 10, 
2015.  Prospective cohort studies in humans investigating the association between starch intake and 
incidence of type 2 diabetes were included. Full article review and data extraction were conducted by 
two independent investigators.  Pool analyses were conducted using the generic inverse variance 
method with random effects models.  Interstudy heterogeneity was assessed using the Cochran Q (X2) 
statistic and quantified by I2 statistic. 
Results: 12 prospective cohort studies were included with a total of 137,840 otherwise healthy and 
non-diabetic participants. The risk ratio for incident type 2 diabetes comparing the highest to the 
lowest quintile of starch intake was 0.90 g (95% CI, 0.81, 1.00 g), I² = 0%, P =0.04.   
Conclusion: Our meta-analysis found that starch, regardless of the amount consumed was related 
with a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes.  Our evidence is supported by prospective cohort studies only, 
and more research clarifying the mechanisms by which starch reduces the risk for type 2 diabetes 
should be explored.   
 

78 
 

