22.  Evaluation of the Antidiabetic Activity of Roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa) via 

Inhibition of alpha-Glucosidase Evelyn Ambush & Patience Obih 

(Evelyn Ambush) 
 
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that has become a global problem. Currently, it is the seventh 
leading cause of death in the United States and affects more than 25 million Americans. It is 
associated with many complications such as retinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy. One of the 
therapeutic approaches to treat diabetes is to slow down the postprandial hyperglycemia through the 
inhibition of α-glucosidase. Drugs like acarbose and miglitol that possess this mechanism of action are 
already in the market. These drugs also produce gastrointestinal symptoms as their side effects. An 
antidiabetic agent with little or no side effects is preferred and will be a better substitute.  The objective 
of this study was to investigate the inhibitory activities of Hibiscus sabdariffa commonly known as 
hibiscus, roselle, zobo drink, or red tea, on α-glucosidase. Roselle extract obtained by homogenizing 
the calyces with ethanol in a blender and evaporating the filtrate, was used in enzyme inhibition 
studies. The study was done in vitro using α-glucosidase obtained from Bacillus Stearothermophilus. 
The inhibition study was carried out in a 96 well plate using PNPG as the substrate and measured with 
Thermo Scientific® Multiskan spectrometer. IC50 was obtained and compared with that of acarbose. 
The result showed that roselle has some inhibitory activity on α-glucosidase. However, more studies 
are needed to elucidate its antidiabetic potential. 
 
 
23.  Angiotensin-(1-7) Decreases Body Weight and Adiposity by Regulating Lipid 

Metabolism in Rats 

(Carolina Campos Lima Moreira) 
 
Carolina CL Moreira1*, Valéria E Chaves2, Robson AS Santos1, Leida M Botion1. 
1Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil; 2Department of Physiology, Federal University of São João Del-Rei, Divinópolis, MG, Brazil. 
E-mail: cclm85@yahoo.com.br  
 
Objective: The prevalence of obesity and obesity-related diseases, like insulin resistance and 
metabolic syndrome, continues to increase worldwide. Our purpose was to investigate the role of the 
peptide angiotensin-(1-7) in the management of adiposity through changes in lipid metabolism. 
Methods: We evaluated the lipid metabolism of transgenic rats that overexpress an angiotensin 
(Ang)-(1-7)-producing fusion protein, TGR(A1-7)3292 (TGR), which induces a lifetime increase in 
circulating levels of this peptide. Male Sprague-Dawley rats, control (C) and TGR, 12-15 weeks old, 
were used, and body weight and visceral adiposity index were analysed. Serum levels of 
triacylglycerols (TAG) and TAG-VLDL were assayed. Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), TAG hydrolases and de 
novo lipogenic activities were evaluated in the epididymal and retroperitoneal adipose tissues. Data 
are means±SEM (P<0.05).  
Results: The results obtained in fed rats showed reduction of body weight (20%) and visceral 
adiposity (35%) in the TGR group in relation to control. Reductions in serum levels of TAG (24%) and 
TAG-VLDL (14%) were observed in the TGR group when compared to control. Significant reduction of 
basal lipogenesis in the epididymal (TGR:124±14; C:279±36) and retroperitoneal (TGR:4.4±0.6; 
C:10.6±0.8) adipose tissues of the TGR group was observed. The transgenic animals also presented 
decreased LPL activity in the epididymal (TGR:0.70±0.06; C:1.56±0.18) and retroperitoneal 
(TGR:0.33±0.05; C:0.77±0.11) adipose tissues. TAG hydrolases activity decreased in the epididymal 
adipose tissue (TGR:0.51±0.03; C:0.71±0.04) and increased in the retroperitoneal adipose tissue 
(TGR:1.01±0.05; C:0.79±0.05) of transgenic rats. 
 

79 
 

