Conclusions: Our data show that increased levels of Ang-(1-7) induces a reduction in body weight 
and adiposity, by inhibiting lipid accumulation processes, which could represent an attractive 
therapeutic tool for management of obesity and related disorders. 
Protocol registration: 88/2012 (CEUA/UFMG) 
Funding: CAPES, CNPq, FAPEMIG 
 
 
24.  Pterostilbene Reduces Fat Deposition in Liver and Epididymal Adipose Tissue of 

Obese Rats 

(Carolina Campos Lima Moreira) 
 
Carolina CL Moreira1*, Letícia MS Cordeiro1, Érica G Mario1, Angélica H Rodrigues1, Damiana D 
Rosa2, Leida M Botion1. 
1Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil; 2Department of Nutrition and Health, Federal University of Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil. 
E-mail: cclm85@yahoo.com.br  
 
Objective: Obesity is a chronic disease associated with disorders like insulin resistance, diabetes, 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and dyslipidemias. Our aim was to investigate the role of 
pterostilbene, a phytoalexin found in blueberries and grapes, in the metabolism of a rodent obesity 
model. 
Methods: The obesity was induced by subcutaneous injection of monosodium glutamate (MSG) 
during the first ten days of life. At 70 days of age, control (C) and MSG (M) animals were divided into 
groups that received by gavage pterostilbene (P) (40 mg.kg-1.day-1) or vehicle (V) during 20 days. 
P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
Results: The results showed increase in the Lee index and in the weight of epididymal adipose tissue 
in MSG group (MV) compared to control (CV). Treatment of obese rats with pterostilbene (MP) 
decreased these parameters compared to MV. Serum triacylglycerols (TAG) levels increased in MV 
group when compared to CV and pterostilbene in obese rats decreased these parameters compared 
to MV. Regarding epididymal adipose tissue, the results showed that the obese group treated with 
vehicle presented increased lipogenic activity, lipoprotein lipase activity and adipocyte area. The 
treatment of the obese group with pterostilbene reduced lipogenic activity (29%), lipoprotein lipase 
activity (22%) and adipocyte area. Regarding liver, there was a marked increase in the percentage of 
lipid deposition in the MV group compared to CV and reduction (82%) in the MP group compared to 
MV. It was observed a decrease in TAG-hydrolytic activity in the MV (31%) compared to CV and an 
increase in the MP (27%) compared to MV.  
Conclusions: Our data clearly established that the treatment of obese rats with pterostilbene has 
beneficial effects on the reduction of obesity and NAFLD. 
Protocol registration: 87/2012 (CEUA/UFMG) 
Funding: CAPES, CNPq, FAPEMIG 
 
 

 

80 
 

