Osama Hamdy, M.D., Ph.D 
Dr. Hamdy is the Medical Director of the Obesity Clinical Program, Director 
of Inpatinet Diabetes Management, clinical investigator and senior 
endocrinologist at Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston and Assistant 
Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School. Dr. Hamdy completed 
his fellowship in Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism at University of 
Missouri and Harvard University.   
 
Dr. Hamdy and colleagues’ research led to the first discovery that obese 
adults who lost 7% of their initial weight had significant improvement in 
their vascular endothelial function. This improvement may eventually 
prevent progression of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. Dr. 

Hamdy was a co-investigator of several landmark studies; including the NIH-funded “Diabetes 
Prevention Program” and “the Look AHEAD Study”. Dr. Hamdy founded the “Weight Achievement and 
Intensive Treatment-Why WAIT?” program at the Joslin Diabetes Center in 2005, which is currently 
implemented Nationally and Internationally. He is the author of the Haravard Health Publication “The 
Diabetes Breakthrough”, which outlines his experience with long-term diabetes weight management.   
Dr. Hamdy chaired the task force that developed the Joslin Nutrition Guidelines. He is also member of 
the Nutrition Committee of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologist (AACE) that 
developed many of the current guidelines for nutrition and obesity management. Dr. Hamdy co-chairs 
the global task force that developed the Transcultural Diabetes Nutrition Alogrithm (tDNA) and is 
currently leading the effort to improve the quality of diabates care across the globe through 
implementing an effective transcultural lifestyle intervention.  
Dr. Hamdy was nominated by the Harvard Medical School for best mentor award of 2013 and was 
given the Compassionate Caregiver Award of the Kenneth Scwartz Center and the prestigous 
Michaela Modan awrd of the American Diabetes Association. Dr. Hamdy has more than 150 peer-
reviewed original articles, reviews, chapters, conference abstracts and proceedings. He is on the 
editorial board of several medical journals including US Eendocrinology, Journal of Nutritional 
Disorders & Therapy and 2-times section editor of the Current Diabetes Report. He is a member of the 
editorial review board of many scentific medical journals including JAMA, Diabetes Care, Lancet, 
Obesity Research and the Expert Opinions.  
 
Meal replacements in diabetes 
Diabetes specific meal replacements (DSMR) are currently considered an integral part of the medical 
nutrition therapy for patients with diabetes. They are known to enhance weight reduction and improve 
glycemic control. Most DSMR have lower glycemic load (GL) and their carbohydrates content is of low 
glycemic index (GI).  Reduction in both GL and GI reduce glucose area under the curve, A1C, visceral 
fat, serum triglycerides and increase HDL-cholesterol. Look AHEAD study showed that frequent use of 
DSMR together with lifestyle intervention induced better weight loss. Other studies showed that their 
use reduces glucose variability and need for higher insulin doses.  DSMR also have higher amount of 
protein. Recently, it was found that many the amino acids content within the DSMR increase insulin 
and GLP-1 secretions. These changes explain the benefit of DSMR in patients with diabetes. Addition 
of DSMR to diabetes diet is recommended for obese patients with poor diabetes control.   
 

1.  Explain the role of diabetes specific meal replacements as an integral part of medical nutrition 

Learning objectives: 

therapy 

2.  Review the role of meal replacements in enhancing weight reduction in patients with type 2 

diabetes 

3.  Demonstrate the role meal replacements in improving glucose control, reducing glucose variability 

and reducing insulin dose 

4.  Identify the role of meal replacements in stimulating insulin secretion  
5.  Explain the effect of meal replacement  on GLP-1 production  

 
 
 
 

9 
 

