25.  SIRT1 enhances lipid storage and utilization in adipose tissues by promoting 

mitophagy: role of adiponectin 

(Yu Cai) 
 
Yu Cai1*, Ming-Ming Li1, Cheng Xu1, Yu Wang1. 
1Department of Pharmacology & Pharmacy, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.  
E-mail: yuwanghk@hku.hk 
 
Objective: SIRT1, as a NAD+-dependent protein deacetylase, is a key energy sensor controlling 
cellular responses to nutrient availability and in turn protecting against ageing-related metabolic 
diseases. Previous study demonstrated mice overexpressing SIRT1 selectively in adipose tissues 
(Adipo-SIRT1) exhibit increased capacity of lipid storage and utilization, which contributes to their 
enhanced systemic insulin sensitivity. The present study aims to assess whether the beneficial effect 
of SIRT1 is dependent on adiponectin, an adipocyte-derived and insulin-sensitizing hormone. 
Methods: In light of this, Adipo-SIRT1 mice have been crossed with adiponectin-knockout mice (AKO) 
to produce mice with both genetic modifications (Adipo-SIRT1/AKO). 
Results: Compared to Adipo-SIRT1 mice, adiponectin deficiency prevents SIRT1-mediated lipid 
storage in adipose tissues, but enhances ectopic lipid accumulation in liver. Compared to wild type 
mice, Adipo-SIRT1/AKO mice are less insulin sensitive and show impaired glucose tolerance.  
Mechanistically, mitophagy is enhanced by SIRT1 overexpression in adipose tissues, accompanied by 
decreased activity of mitochondrial complex-I. 
Conclusions: Adiponectin is involved in the regulation of mitochondria functions by SIRT1, through 
modulating lipid constituents in adipose tissues. 
Protocol registration: not applicable 
Funding Source: Seeding Funds for Basic Research of The University of Hong Kong, Research 
Grant Council grants (HKU779712M and HKU780613M); Collaborative Research Funds (HKU2/07C 
and HKU4/CRF/10) of Hong Kong; the Area of Excellent Scheme (AoE/P-10-01) established under 
University Grants Committee, HKSAR; and the National Basic Research Program of China (973 
Program) (2011CB504004 and 2010CB945500). 
 
 
 

 

81 
 

