3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Angiotensin- Insulin cross talk - A true translational story from bedside to 
bench 
Sharma S Prabhakar  

Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

Activation  of  renin  angiotensin  aldosterone  system  (RAAS)  has  been  traditionally  incriminated  in  systemic 
hypertension and cardiovascular disease and inhibitors of RAAS have been successfully used for over two decades 
in  management  of  these  conditions.  Additionally  insulin  resistance  underlies  most  patients  with  essential 
hypertension. Arterial hypertension is  an insulin-resistant  condition associated with increased cardiovascular and 
renal  morbidity  and  mortality. Of  specific importance in this context, was the unanticipated  outcome  of  primary 
prevention  of  diabetes  in  a  number  of  large  scale  clinical  trials  that  used  RAAS  inhibitors.  This  interesting 
observation led to intense investigation into the interaction of angiotensin and insulin signaling systems. Evidence 
from these clinical trials as well from experimental models of insulin resistance including our findings in ZSF rat 
model  will  be  presented.  Recent  developments  in  this  field  as  well  as  the  current  understanding  of  the  clinical 
implications  of  the  cross  talk  between  the  insulin  and  angiotensin  signaling  systems  are  the  focus  of  this 
presentation.  One  segment  of  this  lecture  deals  specifically  with  the  discussion  of  the  cellular  mechanisms  of 
angiotensin action which interface with insulin signaling in the context of arterial hypertension. In another part, I 
will  discuss  the  experimental  evidence  that  point  to  multiple  stages  in  the  insulin  signaling  that  are  affected  by 
angiotensin  blockade  which  could  contribute  to  improved  insulin  sensitivity.  Angiotensin  II  inhibits  insulin 
signaling  by  JNK  and  MAPK-mediates  serine  phosphorylation  of  the  insulin  receptor,  IRS-1  and  PI  3-kinase. 
Drugs  acting  on  angiotensin  II  generation  and  signaling  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  hypertension  and  on  type  2 
diabetes  mellitus  prevention.  Implications  to  potentially  develop  new  preventive  and  therapeutic  strategies  will 
also  be  discussed.  Unraveling  the  mechanistic  details  of  such  interaction  opens  up  new  opportunities  to  develop 
innovative preventive and therapeutic strategies in insulin resistant states and metabolic syndrome. 

Biography 

Sharma  Prabhakar  is  a  distinguished  nephrologists  and  physician  scientist  currently  at  Texas  Tech  University 
Health Sciences Centre,  where  he is a tenured professor  in the Departments of Medicine and Cell Physiology & 
Molecular Biophysics and the Chief of Nephrology Division and Vice Chairman, Department of Medicine. He is 
an  established  researcher  examining  pathophysiologic  mechanisms  of  diabetic  nephropathy  and  of  insulin 
resistance in vitro and animal models. In the area of clinical research he initiated and is the principal investigator 
of a number of clinical studies. Dr Prabhakar has over 100 publications including original articles, reviews, book 
chapters  and  published  abstracts  in  prestigious  journals  such  as  the  American  Journal  of  Physiology,  Journal  of 
American  Society  of  Nephrology,  and  Kidney  International.  He  has  recently  published  a  reference  book  on 
“Advances  in  the  pathogenesis  of  diabetic  nephropathy”  and  a  two  volume  reference  book  entitled 
“Glomerulopathies”.  In  recognition  of  his  excellence  in  practice  of  medicine,  Dr  Prabhakar  was  awarded  an 
endowed chair by the University  Medical  Center.  He is active in several professional societies  and organizations 
and is the current President of American Federation for Medical Research. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

