3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Synergy and mechanism of antioxidants N-Acetylcysteine and Allopurinol in 
combating diabetic cardiomyopathy and myocardial ischemic injury 
Zhengyuan XIA 

University of Hong Kong, China 

 

Abstract 

Hyperglycemia-induced  oxidative  stress  facilitates  the  development  of  diabetic  cardiomyopahty  (PMID:  22389139)  and 
exacerbates  myocardial  ischemic  reperfusion  (MI/R)  injury.  Antioxidants  N-acetylcysteine  (NAC)  and  allopurinol  (ALP) 
can  synergistically  reduce  MI/R  injury  in  streptozotocin  (STZ)-induced  diabetes  (PLoS  One.  2011;6:e23967),  but  the 
underlying  mechanism  is  unclear.  We  postulated  that  NAC  and  ALP  may  attenuate  MI/R  injury  primarily  through 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and Jak2/STAT3 mediated endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activation in 
diabetes.  Control  (C)  or  STZ-induced  diabetic  (D)  rats  were  untreated  or  treated  with  NAC  (1.5g/kg/day)  or  ALP  (100 
mg/kg/day)  or  their  combination  for  four  weeks  starting  one  week  after  STZ  injection.  NAC  and  ALP  synergistically 
decreased  myocardial  infarct  size  in  D  rats  subjected  to  30  minutes  of  coronary  artery  occlusion  and  two  hours  of 
reperfusion, which was associated with restoration of myocardial phosphorylations of Akt, STAT3 and eNOS. Exposure of 
cultured rat cardiomyocytes to high glucose and 45 min hypoxia and 2 hours reoxygenation induced post-hypoxic cell death 
reflected as an increase of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  leakage and reduced cell  viability. NAC and ALP synergistically 
decreased  post-hypoxic  cell  death  that  was  associated  with  increased  phosphorylations  of  Akt,  STAT3  and  eNOS.  The 
PI3K inhibitor wortmannin and  Jak2 inhibitor AG490, respectively attenuated NAC and ALP’s protective effects  in  vivo 
and  in  vitro.  We  conclude  that  activation  of  both  the  PI3K/Akt  and  the  Jak2/STAT3  signaling  are  major  mechanisms  by 
which NAC and ALP synergistically attenuated MI/R injury in diabetes.  

Biography 

Zhengyuan Xia had  served as a cardiovascular anesthetist  for  more than 10 years in  China before  he completed his Ph.D 
study at the University  of British Columbia (UBC), in Canada in 2004 and postdoctoral studies at UBC and University of 
Calgary  in  2007.    He  is  Assistant  Professor  and  Honorary  Associate  Professor  at  the  University  of  Hong  Kong,  and  his 
major  focus  of  research  is  cardiac  protection  during  ischemia-reperfusion  in  diabetes.      He  has  published  more  than  65 
papers  in  reputed  journals  and  serving  as  an  editorial  board  member  of  Journal  of  Diabetes  &  Metabolism. 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

