3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Unusual presentation of Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults  
Sayantan Ray  

The West Bengal University of Health Sciences, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Latent  autoimmune diabetes of adult  (LADA) is an  autoimmune endocrine disorder in which despite presence of 
autoantibody  to  pancreatic  islet  cell  progression  to  beta  cell  insufficiency  is  slow.  Hence  it  is  called  slowly 
progressive  type  1  diabetes  mellitus.    It  is  often  confused  with  other  types  of  diabetes  mellitus,  therefore 
encounters both mistaken diagnosis and inappropiate management. LADA is also known as “type 1.5 diabetes” as 
it  shares  symptoms  of  both  type  1  and  2  diabetes.  Autoantibody  to  glutamic  acid  decarboxylase  (anti  GAD65 
antibody)  is  the  most  sensitive  and  specific  marker  for  this  subgroup  of  diabetes.  In  cases  of  positivity  patients 
generally  progress  to  insulin-dependency  within  3  years,  though  some  do  not.  Individuals  with  LADA  usually 
present before 50 years of age and they are mostly non-obese with BMI <25 kg/m2. They usually present with low 
magnitude hyperglycemia and normal or close to normal C-peptide values. Acute hyperglycemic crisis in the form 
of DKA or HHS (hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state) is unusual. We report a clinical case of a 66-year-old female 
who presented for the first time with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and subsequently diagnosed as a case of LADA. 
Presumptive diagnosis of LADA was confirmed with the presence of autoantibody to glutamic acid decarboxylase 
65 (Anti-GAD65 antibody). This case highlights that in the presence  of clinical criteria for  LADA, autoantibody 
measurements need to be considered in patient of  adult onset diabetes to diagnose it and once diagnosed patients 
should receive insulin therapy as early as possible. If not properly treated, such insulinopenic patients may develop 
DKA like our patient.  

Biography 

Sayantan  Ray  has  completed  his  MD  degree  in  General  Medicine  at  the  age  of  28  years  from  the  West  Bengal 
University  of  Health  Sciences  and  presently  working  as  a  senior  resident  in  the  Department  of  Endocrinology, 
Medical College Hospital, Kolkata. He has a good number of publications in peer-reviewed journals.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

