3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Prevalence of silent Ischemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients 
asymptomatic for coronary artery disease: A cross sectional 
study in rural population of Central India  
A.S. Lavekar  

NKP Salve Institute of Medical Sciences, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Progressive CAD remains asymptomatic in many cases of type II diabetes mellitus (DM) and this makes diagnosis 
difficult  at  proper  time.  Routine  screening  of  type  II  DM  for  silent ischemia  with  ECG  remains  controversial  as 
majority  of  patients  present  with  normal  ECG.  We  are  presenting  a  study  focused  on  early  detection  of  silent 
ischemia in type II DM patients among rural population of Central India by using TMT; where modalities such as 
coronary  angiography  and  MDCT  are  not  readily  available  and  finance  is  a  major  issue.  We  also  aimed  at 
predicting risk factors for silent ischemia in this cohort. 161 DM patients with normal baseline ECG were screened 
by  TMT using BPL Dynatrac software ver 3.8. 34 of 161 patients were positive for inducible ischemia. Of these, 
27 underwent exercise stress echo immediately after TMT and presence of RWMA was confirmed in 20 patients. 
All TMT positive patients were advised to undergo coronary angiography.  In present study, age, duration of DM, 
TC,  TGs,  TC/HDL  ratio,  poor  glycemic  control,  diabetic  retinopthy  and  nephropathy  were  the  key  predictors  of 
silent  ischemia  and  association  of  diabetic  nephropathy  is  sensationally  high  with  silent ischemia.  In  conclusion, 
although  the  study  population  was  of  low  socioeconomic  group  with  moderate  to  heavy  working  life  style,  the 
prevalence of silent ischemia  and risk factors remained more or less similar to that of urban population and TMT 
emerged out as an effective screening tool for detection of silent ischemia in this cohort. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

