3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Protective effect of oryzanol isolated from crude rice bran oil in 
experimental model of diabetic neuropathy  

Somsuvra B. Ghatak 

 Nirma University, India 

 

  Abstract 

Several  studies  have  implicated  the  involvement  of  poor  glycemic  control  and  oxidative/nitrosative  stress  in  the 
development  of  diabetic  neuropathic  pain,  an  important  microvascular  complication  affecting  more  than  50%  of  diabetic 
patients.  However,  lack  of  understanding  of  the  underlying  etiology,  development  of  tolerance,  inadequate  relief  and 
possible  toxicity  associated  with  classical  antinociceptives  warrant  the  investigation  of  the  novel  agents  for  relief. 
Therefore,  the  present  study  was  carried  out  to  investigate  the  effect  of  oryzanol  (OZ),  a  commercially-important  potent 
antioxidant component isolated from from crude rice bran oil (cRBO), in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic neuropathy 
in  rats.  After  8  weeks,  diabetic  rats  developed  neuropathy  which  was  evident  from  decreased  tail-flick  latency  (thermal 
hyperalgesia) and increased nociceptive behavior during the formalin test of persistent chemical irritation to the paw. This 
was accompanied by decreased motor coordination based on the evaluation of neuromuscular strength. Na+ K+ ATPase, a 
biochemical marker associated with the development of diabetic neuropathy, was significantly inhibited in the sciatic nerve 
of  diabetic  animals.  The  activities  of  antioxidant  enzymes  and  lipid  peroxidation  levels  were  significantly  elevated  in 
diabetic rats, indicating the involvement of oxidative stress in  diabetic neuropathy. Chronic treatment with oryzanol (OZ) 
(50  and  100  mg/kg)  per  oral  (p.o.)  and  standard  drug  glibenclamide  (Gl)  (10  mg/kg,  p.o.)  significantly  attenuated  the 
behavioral  as  well  as  biochemical  changes  associated  with  diabetic  neuropathy.  The  findings  provide  experimental 
evidence to the protective effects of OZ on hyperglycemia-induced thermal hyperalgesia and oxidative stress which might 
be responsible for diabetes induced nerve damage. 

Biography 

Somsuvra B. Ghatak  is currently a Ph.D. Research Scholar  at  the Department of Pharmacology, Nirma University,  India.  
He has been awarded with the Junior Research Fellow- Professional (INSPIRE) Fellowship by the Department of Science 
&  Technology,  Govt.  of  India,  in  2010  for  a  period  of  5  years.  He  has  received  the  Gold  Medal  for  being  the  ‘BEST 
STUDENT’ of the Masters of Pharmacy program in 2008. He has published 15 papers in reputed national and international 
journals till date. He has one and half years of industrial experience in pharmacokinetics and technical writing in the field 
of clinical research.  

  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

