3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Glycemic control and prevalence of urinary tract infections among diabetic 
patients 
Ajime Tom Tanjeko  

University of Buea, Cameroon 

 

 

Abstract 

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) occur more frequently in diabetic than in non diabetic patients and have been seen 
to  be  the  primary  renal  complication  that  causes  diabetic  nephropathy.  This  study  was  to  investigate  the 
association  between  glycemic  control  and  the  prevalence  of  UTIs  in  clinically  diagnosed  patients  with  diabetes 
mellitus.  One  hundred  and  twenty  five  diabetic  patients  comprising  70  (56.0%)  females  and  55  (44.0%)  males 
attending  the  Buea  and  Limbe  Regional  Hospital  Diabetic  Clinics,  South  West  Region,  Cameroon  were  studied. 
Venous  blood  for  glycosylated  hemoglobin  measurement  and  midstream  urine  samples  were  collected  from  the 
study participants. The midstream urine samples were examined macroscopically and microscopically. They were 
also  tested  for  proteins,  WBCs,  RBCs  and  Ketones  using  a  dipstick.  Culture  was  done  and  isolates  were  tested 
against  commonly  used  antibiotics  and  antifungals.  Urinary  tract  infections  had  a  prevalence  of  41.6%.  Isolates 
showed high resistance to frequently used antibiotics e.g ciprofloxacin (61.3%) and ceftriaxone (70.1%) to cheaper 
antibiotics  such  as  gentamicin  (11.3%)  and  nitrofuration  (13.4%).  Glycemic  control  was  grouped  into  3  major 
groups;  good, fair and poor control. Diabetic patients  with poor glycemic control were  observed to be associated 
with  urinary  tract  infections,  (P=0.001).  Glycemic  control  and  cultures  should  be  performed  regularly  to  isolate 
and treat UTIs in diabetic patients. 

Biography 

Ajime  Tom  Tanjeko  has  completed  his  M.Sc.  in  Chemical  Pathology  [Clinical  Biochemistry]  at  the  age  of  25 
years from the University of Buea, Cameroon.   He is presently a post graduate research assistant at the faculty of 
health  sciences  if  the  University  of  Buea.  Since  he  defended  his  Master’s  thesis  in  January  this  year,  he  has 
published one book and one scientific article. 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

