3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Rat model for diabetic nephropathy: With or without insulin injection? 

Pragasam Viswanathan 

VIT University, India 

 
  Abstract 
This study was designed  to check whether insulin  supplementation is crucial for inducing diabetic nephropathy (DNP) in 
wistar  rats.  Diabetes  was  induced  by  intraperitoneal  injection  of  STZ  (45mg  /  kg  body  weight)  and  blood  glucose  was 
maintained  around  300mg/  dl  by  subcutaneous  injection  of long  acting  insulin.  At  the  end  of  both  20,  and  28  weeks,  the 
histological  changes  in  the  kidney  were  observed  by  haematoxylin  and  eosin,  periodic  acid  schiff  and  masson  trichrome 
staining.  Immunohistochemical  analyses  of  VEGF,  ERK-1,  NF-Kappa  B  and  Bcl-2  expression  were  performed.  The 
biochemical parameters such as albumin, creatinine, glucose, and urea nitrogen were significantly altered (p<0.0001) in the 
diabetic  animals  compared  to  that  of  the  diabetic  animals  supplemented  with  insulin.  Our  histological  analysis  revealed 
thickening  of  the  glomerular  basement  membrane,  macrophage  infiltration,  mesangial  expansion  and  proliferation  along 
with  the  tubular  changes  such  as  glycosuria  and  proteinuria  in  diabetic  rats.  But  these  glomerular  changes  were  not 
observed  in  the  diabetic  animals  supplemented  with  insulin  though  there  were  tubular  changes  such  as  glycosuria  and 
proteinuria.  More  than  50% increase  in  the  expression  of  VEGF,  ERK-1,  and  NF-Kappa  B  was  observed  in  the  diabetic 
animals at the end of the study, with no change in the expression of Bcl-2. We conclude that 45 mg/kg body weight of STZ 
is more appropriate for inducing  DNP in wistar rats  with a body weight of 250  g, and  the  effect of  various treatments on 
DNP could be studied within a period of 7 months without the use of insulin injection. 

Biography 

Pragasam  Viswanathan  has  completed  his  Ph.D.,  at  the  age  of  30  years  from  University  of  Madras,  Chennai  and 
postdoctoral  studies  from  Medical  College  of  Wisconsin,  Milwaukee,  USA.  Currently  he  is  an  Associate  Professor  and 
Division Head of Bio Medical Sciences, School of Bio Sciences and Technology a premier educational University in India.   
He  has  published  more  than  25  papers  in  reputed  journals  and  serving  as  an  editorial  board  member  of  repute.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

