3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

DR PANDA’S ways for long life:-Zero rice, zero oil & belly exercise for 
diabetics & cad 
P.N.PANDA  

Panda Diabetes Centre, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Intent of the study done from 1995 to 2006 over  a  period of  10years over 3000Cases of Both Type-I & Type  –II 
shows a marvelous result that Restriction of Rice to Zero and Little or Zero Oil (EXCEPT CONSUMPTION EFA 
OIL) Consumption with Belly Exercise gives a dramatic effect not only Controlling diabetes but also    reduction 
and reverse of ECG pattern in Diabetes with IHD OR Acute Myocardial Infarction. 

Zero rice: Rice is the most important grain with regard to human nutrition and caloric intake; there are two types 
of rice.  One is polished and  another is unpolished rice. Since polished rice lack of Vitamin B1, B2, B6, and B12 
thus  increases  the  homocystine  level  thus  increase  in  triglyceride  level.  Thus  there  is  much  cardiovascular  risk 
factor. Though Diabetes is linked in cardiovascular events, this polished rice increases the risk of Coronary artery 
disease thus the heart attack. Twenty  years back “Heart attack  was the royal kind of death”  means that those  are 
rich. But it is prevalent now in poor. It is only due to heavy consumption of polished rice. 

Zero oil: However all oil contains both Saturated and Unsaturated Fats. But proportion is less or high. So the lipid 
metabolism process is linked to the breakdown of carbohydrates and fat, both of which are fundamental elements 
of diabetes mellitus. Lipid metabolism occurs in the pancreas and many of the lipid metabolism steps are regulated 
by  insulin.  Insulin  issues  relating  to  both  type  1  and  type  2  diabetes  can  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  lipid 
metabolism  process.  In  India  most  important  factor  is  adulteration  of  oil.  Then  why  we  consume  oil  after  45. 
Again I am emphasizing that Zero Oil does not exclude EFA. 

Belly Exercise: we do quick exhalation and natural inhalation. Normally exhalation takes one fourth of the time of 
inhalation. Quick exhalation and natural inhalation follow each other. Normally exhalation takes one fourth of the 
time  of  inhalation.  Quick  exhalation  and  natural  inhalation  follow  each  other.  During  quick  Exhalation  there  is 
increased in venous pooling. During quick natural Inhalation there is arterial pooling. By this way if there will be 
venous pooling and arterial pooling there will be slow degradation of arterial plaque. 

Conclusion: ZERO RICE, ZERO OIL & BELLY EXERCISE CAN LEAD TO HAVE MORE LIFE SPAN. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

