3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 
Protective  effect  of  active  compound  isolated  from  Eugenia  jambolana  on 
altered insulin signaling and glucose disposal in STZ induced diabetic rats  
S.B. Sharma  

University of Delhi, India 

 

Abstract 

The persistence of hyperglycemic state during diabetes leads to overactivation of DAG-responsive protein kinase C (PKC) 
which results in attenuation of insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activity and hence blocks downstream insulin-signaling. The 
aim  of  the  present  study  was  to  examine  the  effect  of  an  antidiabetic  compound    (FIIc)  isolated  from  aqueous  extract  of 
fruit-pulp  of  Eugenia  jambolana  on  altered  insulin  signaling  by  estimation  of  PKC  activity  and  receptor  tyrosine  kinase 
activity in streptozotocin-induced  diabetic rats. Toxicological evaluation of FIIc was also done to study its safety  profile. 
The rats were rendered diabetic by STZ (45 mg/kg  body  weight,  i.p.). The compound was orally administered to diabetic 
rats at a dose of 15 mg/kg body weight per day for a period of 30 days. At the end of experimental period, blood was drawn 
to  determine  fasting  blood  glucose  (FBG),  glycosylated  haemoglobin  (GHb),  insulin  levels  and  liver  function  test. 
Thereafter,  the animals were  anaesthetized.  Liver and adipose  tissues were excised and processed to determine  total PKC 
activity and  Tyrosine kinase activity. Liver  and  pancreas  were processed  for  histopathological  examination.  A significant 
(P < 0.001) fall in the levels of FBG and GHb with a concomitant elevation in insulin levels were observed in diabetic rats 
treated with active compound. The compound exhibited significant (P < 0.001) reduction in total PKC activity in liver and 
adipose  tissue  of  diabetic  rats.  Protein  tyrosine  kinase  activity  was  also  significantly  (P  <  0.001)  improved  after  FIIc 
treatment.  Biochemical  and  histopathological  studies  suggest  that  FIIc  is  not  having  any  acute  and  sub-chronic    effect  in 
treated  animals  compared  to  healthy  control.  The  reversal  of  PKC  activity  and  PTK  activity  towards  normal  following 
treatment with FIIc depicts its role in  improving insulin signaling and thus insulin action, which consequently normalizes 
the glucose homeostasis and is relatively safe when administered orally. 

Biography 

Sharma is Prof. in Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical sciences, University of Delhi. She is 
actively involved in teaching and research from last 25 years. She has published more than 55 papers & review article in 
reputed journals. Her area of interest involves purification of herbal compound from medicinal plants/ herb and assess for 
their antidiabetic activity. She has been granted 3 patents including US patent. She is serving as an editorial board member/ 
reviewer of many reputed journals including OMICS group.. She has done supervision of many PhD and MD students.  

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

