3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Influence of curcumin on pioglitazone metabolism and pk/pd: Diabetes 
mellitus 
Neerati Prasad  

Kakatiya University, India 

 

 

Abstract 

                    Curcumin  is the principal  curcuminoid of the popular  Indian spice turmeric. Curcumin inhibits CYP 
1A1,  1A2,  2B1and  3A4.  As  turmeric  is  being  consumed  every  day,  it  is  essential  to  determine  the  potential 
interaction  with  drugs  metabolised  by  CYP  3A4  system.  The  study  was  conducted  to  determine  the  potential 
influence  of  curcumin  on  PK/PD  of  pioglitazone  in  normal  and  diabetic  rats.  Firstly,  three  groups  were  used: 
group 1 group 2 and group 3 composed each of six Male Wistar rats (200-250g) as non diabetic groups. Secondly, 
three other groups: group 4 group 5 and group 6 were selected similarly to test the effects on diabetic group after 
receiving alloxan monohydrate (120mg/kg, i.p). Group 1 and group 2; group 4 and group 5 received pioglitazone 
(10mg/kg; po) and curcumin (60mg/kg; po) respectively. Group 3 and group 6, we tested single dose and multiple 
dose  interaction effects  on non diabetic and diabetic rats  with curcumin for  single day and for eight days. By the 
end of curcumin pre-treatment pioglitazone was given on the eighth day.  0.8 ml blood samples collected via retro 
orbital plexus, at the time intervals of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8 & 24 hrs and double the volume of sample is replaced with 
normal saline intra peritoneally and PK&PD parameters were measured. Curcumin significantly increased AUC & 
AUMC of pioglitazone in both normal and diabetic rats. There was a significant decrease in T max in single dose 
interaction  group  in  both  normal  and  diabetic  rats.  Curcumin  significantly  decreased  the  metabolism  of 
pioglitazone, the combination has a beneficial effect in diabetes and warrants dose adjustment of pioglitazone.  

Biography 

Neerati  Prasad  has  completed  his  Ph.D  at  the  age  of  31  years  from  Kakatiya  University.  He  has  published  more 
than  25  papers  in  reputed  journals  and  serving  as  an  editorial  board  member  of  repute. He  has  successfully 
completed  two  Major  Research  Projects  sanctioned  by  University  Grants  Commision  and  All  India  Council  For 
Technical  Education  from  the  Indian  Government.  His  research  is  strengthened  with  international  collaboration 
with Deakin University, Australia. He also guided 25 M.Pharm students, presently (5) M. Pharm students, and (3) 
Research Scholars are working in his research team. 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

