3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Newer pathways: Interactions between bone and energy metabolism 
GR Sridhar  

Endocrine and Diabetes Centre, India 

 

Abstract 

As people are beginning to live longer, chronic non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and osteoporosis (reduction of 
bone  mass)  are  becoming  common.  People  with  diabetes  tend  to  be  heavier  and  have  increased  bone  mineral  density 
(BMD); It was logically assumed that subjects with increased BMD were not prone to fractures, especially type 2 diabetes; 
however clinical studies were  soon to show that despite an apparently high BMD, fractures  were  more common  in type 2 
diabetes  mellitus. Physiological and molecular biological studies performed to understand the relationship between energy 
metabolism and bone-derived peptides  showed a complex relation between the two systems.  Bone influences glucose and 
lipid metabolism through known  factors such  as leptin and osteocalcin, as well as by transcription  factors such as FOX01 
and ATF4. In addition to being a supporting and protective structure, bone is an active  endocrine organ producing proteins 
that influence and are influenced by glucose and energy  metabolism.  In addition methods  to prevent and manage  diabetes 
mellitus  (physical  exercise  to  prevent  decline  of  cognition,  muscle  mass,  balance  and  of  medications  to  control 
dyslipidemia  and  hypertension)  can  as  well  be  applied  to  prevent  fractures  as  a  result  of  imbalance  and  tripping  over  in 
subjects with diabetes.   

Biography 

GR Sridhar did his MD (Medicine) from Andhra University and DM (Endocrinology) from All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences. He is Director of Endocrine and Diabetes Centre, Visakhapatnam. A Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians 
and Surgeons (Glasgow) and of American College of Endocrinology, he was the President of Research Society for the 
Study of Diabetes in India (2010) and is currently the Vice President of Endocrine Society of India. He was the founding 
editor of Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism. A contributor to major medical textbooks in India, he has more 
than 250 peer-reviewed publications. 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

