3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Prevention of glycation induced albumin modifications and consequent 
toxicity to erythrocytes by few antidiabetic plants 

Rashmi S. Tupe 

Bharati Vidyapeeth University, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Diabetes and vascular complications appear to be multi-factorial in origin, but the accelerated biochemical process 
of glycation as a result of chronic hyperglycemia has been postulated to play a central role in it. Albumin, the most 
abundant plasma protein undergoes glycation leading to clinical implications. The aim of the present study was to 
comprehensively and comparatively investigate the antiglycation potential of the plants which are commonly used 
in  Indian  system  of  traditional  medicine  and  their  possible  protective  effect  against  glycated  albumin  mediated 
toxicity  to  erythrocytes.  Antiglycation  activities  of  these  plant  extracts  was  measured  by  co-incubation  of  plant 
extract  with  albumin-fructose  glycation  model.  The  multistage  glycation  markers-  fructosamines  (early  stage), 
protein carbonyls (intermediate stage)  and AGEs (late stage) were investigated along with measurement of thiols 
and  β  aggregation  of  albumin  using  amyloid-specific  dyes.  Protection  of  erythrocytes  from  glycated  albumin 
induced  toxicity  by  these  plant  extracts  was  assessed  by  measuring  erythrocytes  hemolysis,  lipid  peroxidation, 
reduced  glutathione  and  intracellular  antioxidant  capacity.  Total  phenolics,  reducing  power  and  antioxidant 
activities of the plant extracts were also measured. In vitro glycation assays showed that plant extracts exerted site 
specific  inhibitory  effects  at  multiple  stages,  with  T.  bellirica  showing  maximum  attenuation.  In  erythrocytes, 
along with the retardation of glycated albumin induced hemolysis and lipid-peroxidation, T. bellirica considerably 
maintained  cellular  antioxidant  potential.  Significant  positive  correlations  were  observed  between  erythrocyte 
protection parameters with total phenolics. These plant extracts especially T. bellirica prevents glycation induced 
albumin  modifications  and  subsequent  erythrocytes  toxicity  which  might  offer  additional  protection  against 
diabetic complications. 

Biography 

Rashmi  S.  Tupe  is  currently  Assistant  Professor  in  Biochemical  Sciences  Division,  Rajiv  Gandhi  Institute  of  IT 
and  Biotechnology  (RGITBT),  Bharati  Vidyapeeth  University.    She  is  recipient  of  Woman  Scientist  Fellowship 
from Department of  Biotechnology, Government of  India. She is actively involved  in teaching  and research. She 
has  published  more  than  11  papers  &  book  chapter  in  reputed  journals.  Her  research  interests  are  focused  on 
understanding  the  molecular  mechanism  of  diabetes  and  diabetic  nephropathy,  especially  elucidating  the  role  of 
glycation induced protein modifications. She is currently doing research project funded by Department of Science 
and Technology, Government of India on “Effects of nutraceuticals on diabetic nephropathy” in RGITBT, Pune. 
. 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

