3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Expression of cytokines in diabetic and non-diabetic wounds: Implications 
in wound healing 

Bharath Prasad AS  

Manipal University, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Diabetic  foot ulcer (DFU), one  of the most common complications of diabetes, can lead to high health care costs 
and  affect  significantly  the  quality  of  life.  The  underlying  mechanism  responsible  for  the  chronicity  of  DFU  is 
currently unclear, but it is likely to  be multifactorial. Current knowledge suggests an involvement of a number of 
inflammatory  signal  molecules  including  interleukins  and  chemokines  that  are  key  regulators  in the  tissue  repair 
process.  In  the  present  study,  we  monitored  pro  and  anti-inflammatory  cytokines  in  diabetic  and  non-diabetic 
individuals  with  foot  ulcer  to  corroborate  whether  bacterial  stimulus  can  alter  the  release  of  cytokines  by 
neutrophils. We collected blood samples from individuals with Type 2 diabetes as well as non-diabetic individuals 
with  foot  ulcer  visiting  Kasturba  Hospital,  Manipal.  Neutrophils  were  isolated  by  Ficoll-Pacque  technique  and 
cytokine  profiling  was  performed  from  both  plasma  and  neutrophils  activated  with  LPS.  Plasma  levels  of  IL-1β 
and IL-4 was found to be significantly higher   (**p < 0.01) in non-diabetic subjects whereas levels of IL-10 were 
found  to  be  high  (**p  <  0.01)  in  diabetic  subjects  suggesting  an  imbalance  in  cytokine  expression.  However 
plasma  levels  of  IL-6  and  IL-8  were  unaltered.  Significantly  higher  levels  of  cytokine  (IL-1β,  IL-6,  IL-8)  was 
observed  in  neutrophils  of  diabetic  subjects  when  compared  to  non-diabetic  subjects  in  basal  and  stimulated 
conditions.  Based  on  our  preliminary  results,  we  hypothesize  that  disruption  of  cytokine  network  might  lead  to 
persistent inflammation and tissue damage. Also, the increased cytokines levels  may contribute towards increased 
susceptibility to invasive microorganisms resulting in the chronicity of the wound. 

Biography 

Bharath  Prasad  A.S  is  currently  working  as  Lecturer  and  is  pursuing  his  PhD  in  Manipal  Life  Sciences  Centre, 
Manipal University under the guidance of Dr. Murali and Prof. Satyamoorthy. He received his Master’s Degree in 
Microbiology and Immunology from Manipal College of Allied Health Sciences, Manipal University. His current 
research activities include Microbiological and immunological aspects of wound healing in diabetes, metal toxicity 
and chelation. 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

