3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Psychoanalysis of the stress related diabetes mellitus  
M. W. S. Janakanthi Kumari  

Jodhpur Ayurved University, India 
 

  Abstract 

The  science  of  Ayurveda  explicates  that  the  negative  sentiments  lead  to  psychosomatic  disorders.  Acharya  Caraka  and 
Sushruta  have  highlighted  that  psyche  and  body  are  the  seat  for  the  diseases  and  they  are  interrelated.  This  study  was 
undertaken  to  critically  investigate  the  psychology  behind  the  stress  associated  Diabetes  mellitus.  Literary  material  in 
Ayurveda texts has  been reassessed on logical justification. Important reasons of stress related Diabetes has  been included 
under causative factors of Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Pramehas (Diabetes). Bearing urges, avoiding meals, psychological 
trauma,  anxiety,  grievances,  insomnia  and  distractive  mannerism  in  Vataja  Prameha  Nidana  demonstrates  characteristic 
origin  of  stress.  In  Pittaja  Prameha,  contributory  factors  include  worries,  tiredness  and  anger  which  are  also  some  key 
signs of stress. People with stress often avoid their daily routine, get depressed and show a sedentary lifestyle as mentioned 
in  Kaphaja  Prameha.  Harita  Samhita  has  mentioned  that  stress  and  wrongful  behavior  lead  to  Diabetes.  Passion,  anger, 
bewilderment,  greediness,  fear,  attachment,  jealousy,  ego,  pride,  grief,  worry,  anxiety,  fear  and  excitement  etc.  morbid 
mental faculty. When these disorders persist, they are escort to somatic diseases counting Diabetes. Wholesome food taken 
even in appropriate quantity does not get properly digested, once the individual is afflicted with those pessimistic emotions 
and  the  result  is  the  derailed  metabolism  which  direct  to  the  path  of  Diabetes.  Therefore  Diabetes  can  be  identified  as  a 
disease that is initiated and provoked by psychological factors and the most of these signs and symptoms observed can be 
placed under a broad heading of “Stress”.  

Biography 

M.W.S.Janakanthi Kumari (M.D-Ayu), is reading for the Ph.D. at National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur. Her research 
work is on Stress related Diabetes Mellitus. She is a Senior Lecturer of Basic Principles at the Institute of Indigenous 
Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka. She has published more than 30 Research Papers & 20 Abstracts. She is a 
Life member of Sri Lanka Association of the Advancement of Science, Senior Scientist Forum-NASTEC, National Science 
Foundation, Institute of Biology, Population Association of Sri Lanka and Royal Asiatic Society of Sri Lanka. She is one of 
the Chief Editors of “Vimarsha” Journal & Associate Editor of Sri Lanka Journal of Indigenous Medicine (SLJIM). 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

