3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

A review of Ideal Diabetic Diet through Ayurveda  
P. R. Waratenne  

Rajasthan Ayurveda University, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Diabetes is the most common metabolic disease of the modern world in which blood glucose level is increases due 
to malfunctioning of the Pancreas. According to Ayurveda there are 20 types of Prameha (Diabetes) and all forms 
of  Diabetes,  if  not  treated  at  the  appropriate  time,  become  changed  to  Madhumeha  (Diabetes  mellitus). 
Considering  the  causes,  lack  of  physical  exercise,  severe  pressure  of  mental  work  and  stress,  faulty  lifestyle  and 
wrong dietary pattern are some of the factors that lead to Diabetes. On the other hand consuming the ideal diet is 
essential for the management of Diabetes. The goal of a diabetic diet is to avoid any surges in the blood glucose by 
maintaining  ideal  body  weight  through  proper  nutrition.  The  diabetic diet  is  an  otherwise  normal balanced  diet 
with a few modifications and proper spacing between food intakes. Some herbs which have been used in Diabetes 
can  be taken as  foods  as well as drugs; the difference is the  amount and the method of using. Some  of them are 
Barley,  Green  gram,  onion,  Bitter  gourd,  old  rice,  Bael  (Aegle  marmelos),  turmeric  (Curcuma  longa),  Neem 
(Azadirachtha indica). Roasted rice and wheat which are more useful. The diet should be prominent in Tikta rasa 
(bitter  taste)  and  avoid  Madura  rasa  (Sweet  taste)  which  increasing  Kapha  dosha.  Hence  Diet  planning  is  the 
cornerstone  of  managing diabetes.  So  Diabetes  is  considered  as  a  lifelong  disorder  by  modern  medical  science 
however, can be controlled and managed by changes in lifestyle and diet regulation. 

Biography 

P.R.Waratenne  has  completed  her  MD  (Ay)  from  Banaras  Hindu  University,  India  and  is  the  Ph.D  scholar  in 
National Institute of Ayurveda, Rajasthan Ayurveda University, Jaipur and her research field is on Acne. She is a 
senior lecturer in the Institute of Indigenous Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka. She has published more 
than 15 papers in different journals and is an associate editor of Sri Lanka Journal of Indigenous Medicine.      

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

