3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Effects, management and impact of diabetes among the Lebanese 
community in Sydney metropolitan area  

Wissam Mustapha  

University of Sydney, Australia 

 

 

Abstract 

Background: Diabetes is a global health concern which is known to be more prevalent among certain cultural and 
ethnic  groups.  While  genetics  may  be  a  contributing  factor,  the  higher  incidence  or  difficulties  in  managing  the 
disease  may  be  attributable  to  cultural  habits  over  generations.  Studies  have  found  the  prevalence  of  diabetes 
among  the  Middle  Eastern  community  is  unusually  high;  however  there  is  lack  of  information  on  prevalence  of 
diabetes among Lebanese community in Australia. The aim of this study is to examine the effects  of diabetes, its 
effective management and impact on this community.  

Methods:  A  quantitative  method  was  used.  A  total  200  Lebanese  migrants  living  in  Sydney  metropolitan  area 
(SMA) who had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at least six months prior to the study, recruited purposively 
from  SMA  surgeries  serving  primary  the  Lebanese  residential  communities.  The  study  was  based  on  a 
questionnaire  that  comprised  of  questions  regarding  background  information,  health,  diagnosis  and  treatment  of 
diabetes, lifestyle, quality of life, and management and emotion well being of participant. Management of diabetes 
was measured using the Patient Activation Measurement (PAM) scale. Four stages of management activation were 
identified from 13 questions in PAM: 1.Understanding their role and responsibility and Active role in taking care 
of  own  health,  2.  Understanding  about  recommended  health  regimes  3.  Confident  in  preventing  and  reducing 
further heath problems 4. Adopting new behaviour.  

Results:  The results show that the mean age of the participants  is 48 years, the majority are  male (78%) and are 
married (94%).  More than a third had formal education and less than half are employed at  the time  of the study. 
Over a third of the participants’ have complaints of impeded mobility, less than half struggled with personal care 
and  hygienic  issues,  and  74%  experienced  difficulties  at  work.  Moreover,  diabetes  incapacitates  80%  of  those 
attempting to do household chores and  more than 75% experienced pain and discomfort and 73.5% endure bouts 
of anxiety and depression due to diabetes. The t test results showed that males are more likely to follow a medical 
plan than their female counterpart, while ANOVA showed that the middle aged participants are significantly more 
confident in following the medication plan compared to the young and older cohort, both results were significant 
at p=<0.05.  

Conclusion: The results of the present study suggest that diabetes affects both physical and emotional health of the 
participants of the study. An effective and focused diabetic education tailored to women, young and older cohorts 
seems necessary to  improve  their understanding of treatment regimes, hence enhancing effective  management of 
diabetes. As  individuals with diabetes  may  experience considerable anxiety and stress  as they attempt to  manage 
their disease, additional studies may be necessary to determine an effective approach, incorporating the emotional 
effects  on  individuals  with  diabetes,  as  the  perceived  causes  may  not  relate  entirely  to  this  populations’  disease 
status but rather incorporate their lifestyle and social-economic situation.  

Biography 

Wissam Mustapha is a Ph.D candidate from the University of Sydney, Faculty of Health Sciences. He has been 
working on this project as part of his PhD thesis for the last two years. He has a medical background, and 
currently working as a part-time tutor/lecturer at various universities including University of Sydney and 
University of Technology Sydney. He also works part time in a GP clinic. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

