3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  
 

Laboratory medicine in the management of diabetes mellitus 
Asegaonkar Shilpa  

Government Medical College, India 

 

Abstract 

Laboratory  medicine plays crucial role in management of Diabetes Mellitus. Biomarkers are used for screening, diagnosis, 
monitoring and to detect complications of Diabetes Mellitus. High risk individuals should be screened for prediabetes and 
DM  with laboratory  measures  plasma glucose and glycosurea because  onset of  T2 DM  and complications is estimated to 
occur  4-7  years  before  clinical  diagnosis.  New  biomarkers  hsCRP,  adiponectin,  apolipoprotein  B  showed  improved 
prediction of DM by 14% in women and 21%in men. Plasma glucose estimation  from an accredited laboratory is the  sole 
diagnostic criterion for diagnosis of DM.  

HbA1C is an accurate, precise measure of retrospective glycemic control that correlates well with risk of complications. It 
should  be  assayed  using  standard  IFCC  reference  method  for  calibration.  ADA  recommends  biannual  assay  of  HbA1C 
which  should  be  <7%  to  monitor  therapy.  Fructosamine      marker  of  glycemic  control  over  last  1-3  weeks  is  not 
recommended routinely. Diabetic dyslipedemia characterized by small dense LDL particles, hypertriglyceridemia and low 
HDL contributes to cardiovascular disease, needs aggressive treatment. Hence annual lipid profile testing is necessary. 

One major area of concern in diabetics is to assess renal function as 35% of type 1 diabetics and 15-60% of T2DM develop 
nephropathy.  Microalbuminurea  measured  by  Albumin  Creatinine  ratio  in  random  urine  is  associated  with  risk  of  ESRD 
and  CVD.  Annual  testing  is  recommended  to  prevent  progression  of  nephropathy  by  intervention  with  ACE  inhibitors. 
Noninvasive glucose monitoring, genetic testing, autoantibodies, insulin, C-peptide are used for research purpose. Clinical 
laboratory is a vital component in management of diabetic patients.   

(Abbreviations:  DM-  Diabetes  mellitus,T2DM-  type  2  Diabetes  Mellitus,  CVD-cardiovascular  disease,  ESRD-  end  stage 
renal disease, HbA1C- glycated haemoglobin, IFCC- international federation of clinical chemistry, hsCRP high sensitivity 
C  reactive  protein,  ACE-  Angiotensin  converting  enzymes,  ADA-  American  Diabetes  Association,  HDL-  high  density 
lipoprotein, LDL- low density lipoprotein) 

Biography 

Asegaonkar Shilpa M.D. Medical Biochemistry from Marathwada University is working as Asst. Professor since 10 years. 
She passed course in clinical nutrition. To her credit 1 international, 1 national paper pubished and 3 papers sent for 
publication. Her presentation on cardiovascular risk factors in CKD selected as guest lecture at National conference of 
medical biochemists of India. She is a member of Institutional Ethical Committee.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

