3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

S-CAGE-Study of C - reactive protein and glycosylated haemoglobin in 
adult type 2 diabetes mellitus 
Gomi Basar  

Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Study  of  C  -  reactive  protein  and  Glycosylated  Haemoglobin  in  Adult  Type  2  Diabetes  Mellitus  (S-CAGE). 
Diabetes  Mellitus (DM) is  a  syndrome characterized by hyperglycemia and  disturbances of  carbohydrate, fat and 
protein  metabolism  associated  with  absolute  or  relative  deficiencies  in  insulin  secretion  and  /  or  insulin  action. 
T2DM  &  atherosclerotic  cardiovascular  disease  have  common  antecedent.  Markers  of  inflammation  can  predict 
coronary heart disease & it is also raised in patients with T2DM. 

Aims and objectives: To asses levels of HbA1C and CRP in T2DM patients & correlate HbA1C & CRP as a marker 
of systemic inflammation in T2DM patients.  

Methods and materials: Cross-sectional study conducted among 100 T2DM patients attending Diabetes clinic and 
admitted  in  the  Medicine  ward,  RIMS  hospital.  Estimation  of  HbA1C  was  done  by  Fast  Ion  Exchange  Resin 
Separation Method & CRP was done by Latex Agglutination Slide Test. 

 Results:  51  CRP  +ve  against  49  CRP  –ve  cases  found.  The  mean  HbA1c  level  was  8.04  ±  1.74  %.  Correlation 
between CRP and HbA1c found  highly  significant (P=0.000).  These results  suggest that at higher levels of HbA1c 
the percent of people with CRP +ve (≥ 0.60 mg/dl) is significantly higher. Association of CRP and type of therapy 
found to be  highly significant (χ2    = 15.641).Positive  correlation  demonstrated  between HbA1c and  TC, TG and 
LDL while negative correlation shown with VLDL & HDL. 

Discussion:  This  study  demonstrated  that  higher  HbA1c is  significantly  associated  with  elevation  of  CRP.  These 
results  imply  a  significant  relation  between  inflammation  and  glycated  haemoglobin  level  in  patients  with 
established diabetes. 

Biography 

Gomi  Basar  has  completed  his  MBBS  at the  age  of  24  years  from  Kottayam  Medical  College  Kerela,  Mahatma 
Gandhi  University  and  currently  pursuing  Post  Graduation  in  Biochemistry  from  Regional  Institute  of  Medical 
Sciences,  Manipur  University  Imphal.  He  is  currently  doing  research  project  funded  by  Department  of 
Biotechnology  Government  of  India  on  “Serum  Gamma  Glutamyl  Transferase  in  Metabolic  Syndrome”  in 
RIMS,Imphal 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

