3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Diabetes and built environment – Emerging cognitive science approach  
Sudhir Kumar Pasala  

Andhra University, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Diabetes,  rather  than  genetic  predisposition  factor  is  today  predominantly  becoming  a  lifestyle  disease.  Though 
there  is  direct  link  of  Food  intake  and  Energy  expenditure  with  respect  to  metabolic  syndrome  diseases, 
Environmental factors of the built environment are the underlying reasons for the recent growth rate especially in 
urban areas.  Urban  populations are more prone to physical/mental health issues that are chronic, while increased 
stress  is  the  cause  for  most  of  the  health  problems.  Stress  predominantly,  through  response  of  people  in  built 
environments  is  leading  to  physiological  and  psychological  health  issues  influencing  metabolic  activity  and 
hormonal imbalances. Broadly, the responses are due to perception of complex sensory inputs of information. 

1.  Built  environment  factors  as  attributes,  influences  movement  and  navigation  that  have  bearing  on  metabolic 
activity through Physical activity thereby causing stress along with the effect of food intake. 

2. There is growing evidence on regulation of insulin and leptin hormones through cognitive functions. Attributes 
of  built  environment  as  cues  of  sensory  inputs  in  regulating  the  functions  of  these  hormones  are  leading  to 
metabolic related diseases. 

Though Visual sensory system is predominant especially in the first case, all the sensory systems in both cases and 
multi-sensory systems seem to  provide comfort – discomfort  –  stress leading to Diabetes apart from  food intake 
and  energy  balance.  As  most  of  the  lifetime  is  spent  in  built  environments,  assessment  of  comfort/stress  of  the 
features  of  built  environment  is  important.  The  paper  is  extensive  review  in  various  disciplines  involved  in 
Insulin/Leptin  relation  to  features  of  built  environment  and  cognitive  sciences.  Environmental  enrichment  by 
introducing  dynamism  rather  than  static  models  in  built  environments  seems  to  show  promising  results  in 
prevention of these diseases that are rampant. 

Biography 

Sudhir  Kumar  Pasala  has  completed  Ph.D  in  Architecture  in  the  year  2011  at  the  age  of  41  from  Andhra 
University  and  pursuing  research  in  cognitive  sciences  in  built  environment.  He  has  association  with  Dr.  GR 
Sridhar,  Director,  Endocrine  and  Diabetes  Center,  Visakhapatnam,  Prof.  Allam  Appa  Rao,  Director,  AIMSCS, 
University  of  Hyderabad,  Hyderabad  and  Dr.Kosuri  Madhu,  Department  of  Psychology  and  Parapsychology, 
Andhra University during his research and continues in further exploration and innovation. He has publications in 
Built  Environment  and  Diabetes  and  held  a  National  Conference  recently  in  Built  Environment,  Cognitive 
Sciences and Health Issues during Feb, 2012 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

