3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Antihyperglycemic and renal protective effects of Trichodesma 
amplexicaule in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats 

D. Sudharshan Reddy  

Nizam Institute of Pharmacy, India 

 

Abstract 

Diabetic nephropathy is a major complication of diabetes mellitus resulting in end-stage renal disease. Prevention 
or  reversal  of  diabetic  nephropathy  is  a  major  challenge  in  the  current  management  of  diabetes.  The  aim  of  the 
present study  is to evaluate the hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic  and nephroprotective  effects of the hydro alcoholic 
extract of the Trichodesma amplexicaule in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. 

Trichodesma  amplexicaule  (Boraginaceae)  is  widely  used  in  traditional  system  of  medicine  to  treat  dysentery, 
snake  bite,  urinary  diseases  and  diabetes.  The  root  extract  of  the  plant  is  reported  to  possess  several  biological 
activities  such  as  antidiarrheal,  antispasmodic,  antimicrobial,  anti-inflammatory  and  lipoxygenase  inhibitory 
activity. The whole plant is evaluated for cough reflex induced by sulphur dioxide in animal model. Many potent 
secondary  metabolites  like  non-steroidal  compounds;  hexacosane,  21,  24-hexacosadienoic  acid,  sitosterol,  oleic, 
linoleic,  palmatic,  stearic  and  linolenic  acid  are  reported  which  might  contribute  to  various  pharmacological 
activities.  In  the  present  study  whole  plant  hydroalchoholic  extract  of  Trichodesma  amplexicaule  has  been 
screened for hypoglycemic  activity.  The hypoglycemic activity was carried out in normal  and Streptozotocin (60 
mg/kg) induced diabetic rats at two different doses (100, 200mg/ kg)  orally for 21 days. Blood sugar level,  body 
weight  changes  were  monitored  periodically.  At  the  end  of  the  treatment  period,  the  serum  from  control  and 
diabetic  animals  were  subjected  to  the  estimation  of  lipid  profile,  alanine  transaminase  (ALT),  aspertate 
transaminase  (AST),  Blood  urea  nitrogen  (BUN),  urine  albumin    and  creatinine.  Effect  of  extract  on  glucose 
tolerance was carried out.  Trichodesma amplexicaule was found  to produce significant hypoglycemic activity  in 
diabetic  animals  which  could  be  compared  to  glibenclamide  (5  mg/kg).  The  elevated  triglycerides,  total 
cholesterol, ALT, AST, urea and creatinine levels were significantly reduced in diabetic rats after drug treatment. 
The protective effect of Trichodesma amplexicaule was further  confirmed  by histopathological examination. The 
present study justifies the folkloric use of the plant to treat diabetes.  

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

