3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Role of hyperglycemia in the progression of β cell dysfunction in cultured 
pancreatic hamster cells and to determine the effect of the phenolic 
compounds extracted from Gelam honey  
Rajes Qvist  

University of Malaya, Malaysia 

 

 

Abstract 

The  hallmark  of  type  2  diabetes  (T2DM)  is  pancreatic  β  cell  dysfunction  and  insulin  resistance.    Loss  of  β  cell 
function  caused  by  reduced  secretory  capacity  and  enhanced  apoptosis  is  a  key  event  in  the  pathogenesis  of 
T2DM.  Oxidative stress  induced by  reactive oxygen and nitrogen species is critically involved in the impairment 
of beta cell function during the development of diabetes. This is due to the relatively low expression of antioxidant 
enzymes such as catalase and glutathione peroxidase. It has been reported that extracellular hyperglycemia causes 
intracellular  hyperglycemia  in  β  cells  leading  to  the  induction  of  ROS  in  pancreatic  islets  of  diabetic  animals. 
Transient exposure of beta cells to oxidative stress interrupts the transduction of signals normally coupling glucose 
metabolism  to  insulin  secretion.We  set  up  an  in-vitro  culture  system  with  pancreatic  hamster  cells  (HIT-T15) 
which were cultured under normal and hyperglycemic conditions for 24, 48, and 72 hrs. There was an increase in 
the production of ROS up to 24 hrs after which it   reached a plateau.  In a 24 hr culture, the secretion of insulin 
was inversely related to the production of ROS. The pre treatment of the cells with the phenolic extracts from the 
local  Malaysian  honey  (Gelam  honey),  and  the  phenolic  compounds  (chrysin, luteolin,  and quercetin)  for  24  hrs 
showed a significant decrease in the production of ROS and a significant increase in the secretion of insulin. This 
finding suggest a  potential use of the phenolic compounds extracted from  Gelam honey   in treating the diabetes, 
and provides further support for the implication of oxidative stress, in β cell dysfunction. 

Biography 

RajesQvist    obtained  her    Phd    from  University  of  Strasbourg,  France    Besides  her  Phd  She  has  several  other 
degrees    which  gives  her  a  broad  training  in  several  areas  of  biological  sciences:-  Bsc  University  of  Melbourne, 
Australia;  BscHons  Biochemistry , University of Singapore; BscHons Virology, University of Western Australia, 
Msc  Clinical  Biochemistry  University  of  Singapore;  Post  Graduate  Diploma  in  Immunologty  ;  Monash 
University , Australia. Post doctoral work in Denmark, Japan and Australia where she specialised in several areas 
with the main focus on Diabetic research. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

