3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

 

Cardiovascular disease, Diabetes and the ED 
patient - Role of endothelial function  

 
Sudhakar 

 

 

Abstract 

Erectile Dysfunction is considered by many to be the tip of the iceberg of a systemic vascular disorder. There is an 
intimate  nexus  between  Erectile  Dysfunction  and  Cardiovascular  Disease.  The  Endo  PAT  2000  is  a  new 
noninvasive technology to measure endothelial dysfunction, which is considered to  be one of the first markers of 
cardiovascular  disease.  In  fact,  some  believe  that  Erectile  Dysfunctionn equals  Endothelial  Dysfunction 
(Alexander  Muller  &  John  P.  Mulhall,  Current  Opinion  in  Urology  16:435  -  443)  75  patients  presenting  with 
Erectile Dysfunction were screened for Endothelial Dysfunction in a clinical setting, using the Endo PAT 2000. Of 
these, 24 patients had established Endothelial Dysfunction (defined as RHI<1.67), and 22 patients had borderline 
Endothelial Dysfunction (1.67<RHI<2.1). In the clinical series, 61% of patients evaluated for Erectile Dysfunction 
had  some  degree  of  erectile  dysfunction.   The  results  were  broadly  consistent  with  a  paper  on  a  similar  subject 
presented  at  SMSNA  2009  (Osama  Mohamed,  Boback  Berookhim,  Natan  Bar-Chama,  Larry  Lipshultz,  Mohit 
Khera - Baylor College of Medicine). 

Biography 

is 

the  first  Indian  doctor 

to  practice  exclusive  andrology, 

Sudhakar  Krishnamurti 
the  founder  of 
www.andrology.com, and Andromeda,  India’s first exclusive  andrology  center. Presently, he is  appointed on  the 
WHO’s Committee for Sexual Health. Krishnamurti is the only Asian to have ever won the prestigious Newman-
Zorgniotti international award. He got this for having described the Krishnamurti operation for Peyronie’s disease. 
He  has  been  appointed  to  all  three  International  Consultations  in  Sexual  Medicine  held  so  far.  In  2007,  he  was 
admitted to the world’s first sexual medicine fellowship program in Oxford, UK, with a full scholarship. His best-
selling  first  book,  Sex  is  Not  a  Four  Letter  Word,  has  received  rave  reviews  and  been  twice  nominated  for  the 
SSTAR  international  book  award,  USA.  His  flagship  website,  www.ANDROLOGY.com,  has  won  sixteen 
international awards. He lives in Hyderabad, India.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

