3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Anti-diabetic activity of Azima tetracantha leaves in high fructose induced 
diabetic rats  

Amarnath V. Banagar 

SVERI’s College of Pharmacy, India 

 

 

Abstract 

Diabetic  is  syndrome  characterized  by  deranged  carbohydrate  metabolism  resulting  in  abnormally  high  blood 
sugar  level  (hyperglycemia).  It  is  caused  by  hereditary,  increasing  age,  poor  diet,  imperfect  digestion,  obesity, 
sedentary  lifestyle,  stress,  drug-induced,  infection  in  pancreas,  hypertension,  high  serum  lipid  and  lipoproteins, 
less  glucose  utilization  and  other  factors.  The  objective  of  the  present  study  was  to  investigate  anti-diabetic, 
nephroprotective  and  cardio  protective  activity  of  Azima  tetracantha  leaves  extract,  by  using  High  Fructose 
induced  diabetic  rats  as  model  for  clinical  type-2  diabetic.  At  a  regular  interval  of  experimental  protocol  blood 
glucose,  urinary  creatinine,  total  proteins,  triglycerides,  total  cholesterol  and  organs  to  body  weight  ratio  were 
studied.  Statistical  analysis  of  the  results  shown  that  in  High  Fructose  induced  diabetic  rats  chloroform  and 
methanol  extracts  of  Azima  tetracantha  leaves  at  40,  80,  160  and  200  mg/kg  doses.  Azima  tetracantha  leaves 
extract  improved  renal  creatinine  clearance  and  reduce  renal  total  protein  loss  and  reduce  the  triglycerides,  total 
cholesterol  and  increases  the  B-cell  count.    It  is demonstrating  nephroprotective  and  cardio-protective  properties 
due to increase the insulin production. The organ to body weight ratio and the beta cells (per islet section). Azima 
tetracantha  leaves.  These  results  were  also  supported  by  The  Beta  cells  (per  islet  section)  count.  The  findings 
showed  the  significant  antidiabetic  potential  of  Azima  tetracantha  methanol  extract  in  ameliorating  the  diabetic, 
nephroprotective  and  cardio  protective  conditions  in  diabetic  rats.  No  significant  activity  was  observed  in 
normoglycemic rats. 

 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

