3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Angioinhibitory signaling mechanism(s) in choroidal endothelial cells by 
type IV collagen fragment 

Sudhakar Akul-Yakkanti  

Boys Town National Research Hospital, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

Choroidal  Neovascularization  (CNV)  leads  to  loss  of  vision  in  Age  Related  Macular  Degeneration  (AMD)  that 
affects approximately 1 in 3 individuals over the age of 65. CNV of AMD is as common as cancer and one of the 
most  prevalent  causes  of  blindness  in  the  United  States  of  America.  It  has  long  been  recognized  that  drugs 
targeting neovascularization  may provide new and  useful  tools for the treatment of  patients with CNV of AMD. 
The present available therapies in clinical trials come in the form of antibodies or antibody fragments that inhibit 
VEGF,  which  can  only  slow  the  progression  of  this  eye  disease.  A  renewed  effort  must  therefore  be  made  to 
identify  efficient  endogenous  molecules  that  could  be  exploited  as  therapeutic  agents.  Thus,  the  present  study 
shows the different  angioinhibitory signalling  mechanism(s) regulated by collagen type  IV fragment  α3(IV)NC1, 
whose mechanism of actions are yet to be deciphered  

Biography 

Sudhakar Akul Yakkanti is the founder Director of Cell Signaling, Retinal and Tumor Angiogenesis Laboratory at 
Boys  Town  National  Research  Hospital,  Associate  Professor  at  University  of  Nebraska  Medical  Center,  Omaha, 
NE,  USA.  He  did  his  postdoctoral  training  at  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  MA,  USA  (2003).  He  received 
President’s  fellowship  (1992),  GATE  (1996)  and  CSIR  (2007-2000)  fellowships  from  Government  of  India.  He 
received Mahindra & Mahindra Educational Award (2000) and Young Clinical Scientist Awards from FAMRI in 
2007  and  2010.  He  also  received  Bio-Bio  Young  Scientist  Award  from  OMICS  publishing  group;  Michael  A. 
O’Connor  Young  Investigator  Award;  RO1  grant  Award  from  NIH/NCI  and  Research  Scholar  Grant  from  ACS 
(2010-funding on "Pay-if category). He is serving as AIBS/NIH-RO1 Grant reviewer for DT study section. He has 
published more than 40 research articles in several top journals including Science, Cancer Cell, JCI, Blood, PNAS, 
Gastroenterology,  Cancer  Research,  JBC  etc.  He  is  serving  as  an  Editor-in-Chief,  Executive  Editor,  Editor  and 
Editorial  board  member  of  reputed  journals  and  is  serving  as  a  reviewer  for  more  than  26  scientific  journals 
including  JCI,  Blood,  Circulation,  Circulation  Research,  Cancer  research,  Clinical  Cancer  research  etc.  He  was 
honored by giving a position as Keynote Speaker, Chairman, Co-chairman and organizing committee member for 
several international conferences 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

