3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Protein prenylation in glucose-induced insulin secretion 

Anjan Kowluru   

John D. Dingell VA Medical Center and Wayne State University, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

Insulin  secretion  from  the  pancreatic  beta-cell  is  regulated  principally  by  the  ambient  concentration  of  glucose. 
However,  the  molecular  and  cellular  mechanisms  underlying  the  stimulus-secretion  coupling  of  glucose-
stimulated  insulin  secretion  [GSIS]  remain  only  partially  understood.  Emerging  evidence  from  multiple 
laboratories suggests key regulatory roles for GTP-binding proteins [G-proteins] in the cascade of events leading 
to  GSIS.  This  class  of  signaling  proteins  undergoes  a  series  of  requisite  post-translational  lipidation  [e.g., 
prenylation]  by  a  group  of  enzymes  referred  as  prenyltransferases.  A  growing  body  of  evidence  suggests  that 
prenylation  promotes  targeting  of  modified  proteins  to  respective  membranous  sites  for  optimal  interaction  with 
their  effector  proteins.    At  least  3  classes  of  prenyltransferases  have  been  identified  thus  far.  The  farnesyl 
transferase [FTase] catalyzes incorporation of 15-carbon farnesyl group into Ras subfamily of G-proteins [e.g., H-
Ras]  and  nuclear  lamins  [e.g.,  lamin  B].  Geranylgeranyl  transferases  [GGTases]  mediate  incorporation  of  20-
carbon  geranyl  geranyl  groups  into  substrate  proteins.  Among  GGTases,  GGTase-I  lipidates  G-proteins  such  as 
Cdc42,  Rac1,  and  Rho  whereas  GGTase-II  modifies  Rab  GTPases.  Lastly,  both  FTase  and  GGTases  are 
heterodimeric  in  nature  comprising  of  alpha-  and  beta-subunits.  Interestingly,  FTase  and  GGTase-I  share  a 
common  alpha-subunit,  but  variable  beta-subunits.  However,  the  alpha-  and  beta-subunits  of  GGTase-II  are 
distinct  from  GGTase-I.  Data  from  our  laboratory  have  demonstrated  expression  of  FTase,  GGTase-I  and 
GGTase-II  subunits  in  clonal  beta-cells  [INS  832/13  cells],  normal  rodent  islets  and  human  islets.  
Pharmacological  inhibition  of  FTase  [FTI-277]  or  GGTase-I  [GGTI-2147]  markedly  attenuated  GSIS.  siRNA-
mediated knockdown of individual subunits of FTase and GGTase also reduced GSIS significantly.  Furthermore, 
a dominant negative  mutant of  the  common alpha subunit  of FTase/GGTase also inhibited GSIS suggesting  that 
activation of FTase/GGTase is critical for GSIS to  occur. In support of these observations, we also observed that 
both  FTase  and  GGTase  activities  are  increased  significantly  by  glucose  in  INS832/13  cells.  Lastly,  siRNA-
mediated knockdown of the alpha- or beta-subunit of GGTase-II  also resulted in a marked attenuation of GSIS in 
isolated  beta-cells.  Together,  our  data 
indicate  novel  regulatory  roles  for  protein  farnesylation  and 
geranylgeranylation in GSIS. Potential alterations in the functional alteration of these enzymes in beta-cell models 
of glucolipotoxicity and diabetes will be discussed. 

Biography 

Anjan  Kowluru  is  Associate  Dean  and  Professor  Pharmaceutical  Sciences  and  Medicine  at  Wayne  State 
University. He also holds Senior Research Career Scientist position at the John D. Dingell VA Medical Center in 
Detroit. Dr. Kowluru is involved in  understanding  regulatory roles of small G-proteins in islet  function in health 
and diabetes. He published more than 125 papers and presented 225 papers at various local, regional, national and 
international meetings. His research is supported by grants from the NIH, the Department of VA and other private 
foundations including the ADA and the JDRF. He serves [or served] on scientific advisory panels at the NIH, the 
VA,  the  ADA  and  the  JDRF.  He  is  currently  serving  [or  served]  on  the  editorial  boards  of  several  journals, 
including  Endocrinology,  Biochemical  Pharmacology,  American  J.  Physiology-Endocrinology  and  Metabolism, 
Experimental Diabetes Research and the Journal of Diabetes and Metabolism. 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

