3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Emerging therapies for diabetes mellitus in the new millineum 

Sharma S Prabhakar 

Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

The  incidence  and  prevalence  of  diabetes  mellitus  (DM)  is  increasing  around  the  world  steadily  in  the  last  few 
years in epidemic proportions. The total number  of diabetics is estimated to reach 400 million worldwide by the 
year  2030.  This  rapid  growth  in  the  people  affected  with  the  disease  as  well  as  the  morbidity  associated  with 
diabetic complications has warranted the development of new and more effective therapeutic options for both type 
I DM and type 2 DM. The last few decades have witnessed remarkable improvements in the insulin preparations. 
In addition several oral hypoglycemic agents have been developed which are safer and more effective. Among the 
more  recent  agents  released  from  the  pipeline  include  two  forms  of  incretin-based  therapies-  the  dipeptidyl 
peptidase  4  inhibitors  (DPP4)  and  the  glucogon  like  peptide  1  agonists  (GLP-1).  Another  emerging  therapy  that 
appears  promising  involves  inhibition  of  sodium-glucose  co-transporters  (SGLT  1  and  2).  Inhibitors  of  SGLT-2 
are  currently  undergoing  clinical  trials.   A  broad  overview  of  all  such  emerging  therapies  as  well  as  the  current 
status  of  stem  cell  therapy  and  transplantation  approaches  in  management  of  diabetes  is  the  focus  of  this 
presentation. 

Biography 

Sharma  Prabhakar  is  a  distinguished  nephrologists  and  physician  scientist  currently  at  Texas  Tech  University 
Health Sciences Centre,  where he  is a tenured professor  in the Departments of Medicine  and Cell  Physiology  & 
Molecular Biophysics and the Chief of Nephrology Division and Vice Chairman, Department of Medicine. He is 
an  established  researcher  examining  pathophysiologic  mechanisms  of  diabetic  nephropathy  and  of  insulin 
resistance in vitro and animal models. In the area of clinical research he initiated and is the principal investigator 
of a number  of clinical studies. Dr Prabhakar has over 100 publications including original articles, reviews, book 
chapters  and  published  abstracts  in  prestigious  journals  such  as  the  American  Journal  of  Physiology,  Journal  of 
American  Society  of  Nephrology,  and  Kidney  International.  He  has  recently  published  a  reference  book  on 
“Advances  in  the  pathogenesis  of  diabetic  nephropathy”  and  a  two  volume  reference  book  entitled 
“Glomerulopathies”.  In  recognition  of  his  excellence  in  practice  of  medicine,  Dr  Prabhakar  was  awarded  an 
endowed chair by the University  Medical  Center. He is active  in several professional societies  and organizations 
and is the current President of American Federation for Medical Research. 
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

