3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Novel mechanistic concepts in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy 

Sayon Roy 

Boston University School of Medicine, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

Chronic hyperglycemia is a major inducer of diabetic retinopathy, a prominent microvascular complication of both 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in the working age population for 
which unfortunately there is no preventative therapy. One of the fundamental changes closely associated with the 
development of diabetic retinopathy is the thickening of the basement membrane (BM) in the small blood vessels 
of the diabetic retina. Several years of research has established hyperglycemia, the most prevalent characteristic of 
diabetes,  as  a  primary  causal  factor  mediating  this  alteration.  Studies  have  established  the  negative  impact  of 
hyperglycemia on the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy; however, the specific cellular mechanisms that lead to 
the  dysfunction  of  small  vessels  in  diabetes  are  unclear.  In  particular,  it  is  unknown  if  vascular  BM  thickening 
promotes serious structural and functional abnormalities in the diabetic retina. While the association between BM 
thickening and the development and progression of diabetic retinopathy has been observed long ago, only recently 
new evidences have come to light that indicate vascular BM thickening plays a causal role in the pathogenesis of 
diabetic retinopathy. Our research has identified several BM genes, fibronectin, collagen IV, laminin, and cellular 
events  involving  connexin-43  gap  junction  intercellular  communication  that  are  significant  players  in  mediating 
hyperglycemia-driven  vascular  lesions. These  changes  underlie  some  of  the critical pathogenetic roles played by 
the thickened BM in promoting characteristic vascular lesions associated with diabetic retinopathy.  

Biography 

Sayon  Roy  received  his  PhD  from  Boston  University  and  completed  his  postdoctoral  training  at  Schepens  Eye 
Research  Institute,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Harvard  University.  Dr.  Roy  is  currently  a  professor  of  Medicine, 
Section of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, and a professor of Ophthalmology at Boston University School 
of Medicine. Recognized as  an expert in retinal vascular  biology, Dr. Roy’s seminal work has identified several 
genes  in  the  retina  that  are  abnormally  expressed  in  diabetic  retinopathy.  His  pioneering  work  has  led  to  novel 
gene modulatory techniques in retinal vascular cells using antisense oligonucleotides via intravitreal injection. Dr. 
Roy  has  received  numerous  awards  including  the  American  Diabetes  Association  Research  Award  for  the 
commitment and dedication towards the fight  against  diabetes, the 2006 Mentor of the  Year Award from Boston 
University,  and  the  2008  Innovative  Award  from  the  Juvenile  Diabetes  Research  Foundation.  Research  in  Dr. 
Roy’s  laboratory  has  been  funded  by  several  organizations  including  the  National  Eye  Institute,  NIH,  National 
Medical  Technology  Testbed,  American  Diabetes  Association,  Juvenile  Diabetes  Research  Foundation 
International, Fight for Sight, Research to Prevent Blindness, and the Lions Organization. Dr. Roy currently serves 
as a chartered member of the NEI Study Section of the National Institutes of Health.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

