3rd World Congress on
Diabetes & Metabolism

Diabetes-2012

September 24-26, 2012   Marriott Convention Center, Hyderabad, India

 

  

Can we prevent diabetes and its complications? 

Sushil K. Jain  

Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, USA 

 

 

Abstract 

According  to  the  latest  data  from  International  Diabetes  Federation  (IDF),  at  least  366  million  people  are  living 
with diabetes  and  this  number  is  projected  to  be  552  million  by  2030.  At  least  50%  people  with  diabetes  suffer 
from  one  or  two  major  diabetic  complications  such  as  diabetic  cardiomyopathy,  nephropathy,  neuropathy, 
retinopathy and diabetic foot diseases. This lecture will discuss evidence that life style modification and selective 
nutraceuticals supplementation, such as, Broccoli and Curcumin can retard and prevent the on-set of diabetes and 
progression of complications associated with diabetes.  

Biography 

Jain is a  Professor of Pediatrics, Physiology  and  Biochemistry &  Molecular  Biology  and Chief  of the Section of 
Pediatric Research at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport.  Dr. Jain is also appointed to 
the Malcolm-Feist Chair in Diabetes. Jain serve/has served on the editorial boards of the Diabetes, Diabetes Care, 
Free  Radical  Biology  and  Medicine,  Antioxidants  and  Redox  Signaling,  Metabolic  Syndrome  and  Related 
Disorders, J Amer College of Nutrition, Nutrition and Dietary Supplements, and Experimental Diabetes Research 
journals.  Dr.  Jain is      member  of  several  advisory  panels  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.  Jain  has  authored 
165+ peer reviewed publications with over 5000+ Citations.  Dr Jain has received several prestigious awards. Dr. 
Jain’s research focuses on the mechanisms by which dietary nutrients, such as vitamin D, chromium, curcumin and 
vitamin  E  reduces  complications  of  diabetes.    Dr.  Jain  is  funded  by  the  NIH  and  the  American  Diabetes 
Association.  
 

http://omicsonline.org/diabetes2012/ 

